
The REAL Book
of Real Estate
This page intentionally left blank
The REAL Book
of
REAL EXPERTS. REAL STORIES. REAL LIFE.
Robert Kiyosaki
Real Estate
Copyright © 2009 by Robert T. Kiyosaki
Published by Vanguard Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. Printed in
the United States of America. For information and inquiries, address Vanguard Books,
387 Park Avenue South, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10016, or call (800) 343-4499.
Designed by Anita Koury
Set in 10.5 point Mercury
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The real book of real estate : real experts, real advice, real success stories/Robert Kiyosaki.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-1-59315-532-2
1. Real estate investment. 2. Real estate business. I. Kiyosaki, Robert T., 1947-
HD1382.5.R33 2009
333.33—dc22
2009008346
ISBN 13: 978-1-59315-532-2
Vanguard Press books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the United
States by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, please
contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street,
Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810-4145, extension 5000, or e-mail
special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
"I'm not a genius. I'm just a tremendous bundle of experience."
—Dr. R. Buckminster “Bucky” Fuller
From left to right: Dr. R. Buckminster
“Bucky” Fuller at eighty-six years old with
Robert Kiyosaki in 1981. Buckminster Fuller
was an American architect, author,
designer, futurist, inventor, and visionary.
Recognized as one of the most
accomplished Americans in history, he
dedicated his life to a world that worked
for all things and all people.
This page intentionally left blank
Contents
Acknowledgments ix
Introduction, Robert Kiyosaki 1
PART 1: The Business of Real Estate
1 The Business of Real Estate, Tom Wheelwright 5
2 A Real Estate Attorney’s View of Assembling and Managing Your
Team, Charles W. Lotzar 29
3 The Way to Exotic Wealth, Wayne Palmer 53
4 Profits from the Ground Up, Ross McCallister 71
5 Master Your Universe, Craig Coppola 89
6 10 Rules for Real Estate Asset Protection, Garrett Sutton 108
7 Of Marbles and Capital, Wayne Palmer 133
8 How to Avoid and Handle Real Estate Disputes, Bernie Bays 152
PART 2: Your Real Estate Project
9 Buy by the Acre, Sell by the Foot: Understanding Real Needs,
Financial Logic, and Asking Questions, Mel Shultz 173
10 It’s All About Adding Value, Curtis Oakes 184
11 Analyzing the Deal, or Adventures in Real Estate, John Finney 200
12 Real Estate Due Diligence, Scott McPherson 222
13 Creating Value from the Inside Out, Kim Dalton 233
14 Financing for Real Estate Investors, Scott McPherson 251
15 Lease It and Keep It Leased, Craig Coppola 262
16 The Perils of Careless Property Management, Ken McElroy 276
PART 3: Creative Ways to Make Money in Real Estate
17 Getting from A to B Without Paying Taxes, Gary Gorman 293
18 No Down Payment, Carleton Sheets 306
19 Marketing: Your Ticket to Finding and Profiting from Foreclosures,
Dean Graziosi 326
20 Entitlements: The Sleeping Giant of Real Estate Profitability,
W. Scott Schirmer 341
21 The Tax Lien Investment Strategy, Tom Wheelwright 371
22 Horse Trading: The Original Way to Wealth on the Great American
Frontier, Wayne Palmer 390
23 How to Create Retail Magic: A Tale of Two Centers,
Marty De Rito 409
PART 4: Lessons Learned
24 What One Property Can Teach You, Kim Kiyosaki 433
25 In the Beginning . . . , Donald Trump 451
26 What Is the Most Important Thing You’ve Learned From Your
Father About Real Estate?, Donald Trump Jr. and Eric Trump 458
27 Overcoming the Fear of Failing, Robert Kiyosaki 466
Index 481
Credits 501
F or years I have been an advocate for financial education. While many other
financial advisors are telling people what they should invest in, I have been
telling people to invest in themselves—to invest in their own knowledge. That
is what I have done, and it has made me rich. I have also been telling people to
surround themselves with great teachers who are actively practicing what they
preach. The creation of this book was made possible because of the people I
consider my teachers. Each one has a lifetime of experience and a lifetime of
knowledge. And each one knows the importance of continual learning.
The contributors to this book generously gave of their time and their talent
so that you could see the possibilities, avoid the pitfalls, and understand the
methods of building wealth through real estate. They have recollected their
great achievements, and they have revealed their painful failures. I thank them
for their openness. The lessons we learn from our own mistakes and the mis-
takes of others are the most powerful.
These people are not only my advisors, but they are also my friends. Together
we have been through the ups and downs of the real estate cycle, ridden each
wave, and made money doing it. These are the friends I run my ideas and my
deals by. And because they are friends, I know that they will give me their
honest opinions. I thank them for that, too.
Acknowledgments
ix
I’d also like to thank Jan Ayres and Kathy Heasley of Heasley & Partners,
Inc., who took this book from ideas on a flip chart to a finished manuscript.
Special thanks to Rhonda Shenkiryk of The Rich Dad Company and Charles
McStravick of Artichoke Design for their work on the book’s cover. Finally,
thank you to my wife, Kim, who more than twenty years ago said yes to a guy
with no money and a lot of ideas.
x ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
T here are four reasons why I think a real book of real estate is important at
this time.
First, there will always be a real estate market. In a civilized world, a roof
over your head is as essential as food, clothing, energy, and water. Real estate
investors are essential to keeping this vital human need available at a reasonable
price. In countries where investing in real estate is limited or excessively con-
trolled by the government, such as it was in former Communist Bloc countries,
people suffer, and real estate deteriorates.
Second, there are many different ways a person can participate and prosper
with real estate. For most people, their only real estate investment is where they
live. Their home is their biggest investment. During the real estate boom from
2000 to 2007, many amateurs got involved with flipping houses—buying low
and hoping to sell higher. As you know, many flippers flopped and lost every-
thing. In true investor vocabulary, flipping is known as speculating or trading.
Some people call it gambling. While flipping is one method of investing, there
are many, more sophisticated, less risky ways to do well with real estate. This
book is filled with the knowledge and experiences of real, real estate investors—
real estate professionals who invest rather than flip, speculate, trade, or gamble.
Third, real estate gives you control over your investments, that is, if you
have the skills. In the volatile times of early 2009, millions of people were losing
1
Introduction: A Note from
Robert Kiyosaki
Why a Real Book of Real Estate
trillions of dollars simply because they handed over control of their wealth to
other people. Even since the middle of 2008, the great Warren Buffett’s fund,
Berkshire Hathaway, has lost 40 percent of its value! Millions of people have
lost their jobs, which means they had no control over their own employment
either. The real, real estate professionals in this book have control over both
their businesses and investments. They will share their good times and the bad
times with you. They will share what they have learned while learning to control
their investments and their financial destiny. The learning process is continual.
And, finally, here’s my real reason for this book. I am sick and tired of finan-
cial experts giving advice on real estate, especially when they do not actually
invest in real estate. After my book Rich Dad Poor Dad came out, I was on a tel-
evision program with a financial author and television personality. At the time,
in 1999, the stock market was red hot with the dot-com boom. This financial
expert, who was a former stockbroker and financial planner, was singing the
praises of stocks and mutual funds. After the stock market crashed in 2001, this
man suddenly resurfaced with a new book on real estate, portraying himself as
a real estate expert. His real estate advice was beyond bad. It was dangerous.
Then the real estate market crashed and he dropped out of sight again. The last
time I saw him, he had written a book on investing in solar energy and was
claiming to be a green entrepreneur. If he were to write a book about what he
really does, his new book would be about raising bulls . . . and selling BS.
There are other financial “experts” who know nothing about real estate, yet
they speak badly about real estate and say it is risky. The only reason real estate
is risky for them is because they know nothing about investing in it. Instead,
they recommend saving money and investing in a well-diversified portfolio of
mutual funds—investments which I believe are the riskiest investments in the
world, especially in this market. Why do they recommend investing in savings
and mutual funds? The answer is obvious: Many of these professionals are en-
dorsed by banks, mutual fund companies, and the media. It’s good business to
plug your sponsors’ businesses and products.
Commissioning this book gives the public its first chance to learn from real,
real estate investors, friends, and advisors—people who have been through the
ups and the downs and who walk their talk. This book gives them the opportu-
nity to share the spotlight with the many media financial “experts” and speak
the truth. These real estate experts are true pros, and you’re about to move be-
yond the media hype. I hope you are ready. The Real Book of Real Estate is the
real deal.
2 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
PART 1
The Business
of Real Estate
• TOM WHEELWRIGHT
• CHARLES LOTZAR
• WAYNE PALMER
• ROSS MCCALLISTER
• CRAIG COPPOLA
• GARRETT SUTTON
• BERNIE BAYS
This page intentionally left blank
Tom Wheelwright is a rare combination of CPA, real estate investor, and
teacher. He has the ability to take the complex and often boring subject of
tax and tax law and make it into something that’s simple enough for a person like
me to understand.
Tom understands the tax code. He actually enjoys reading the tax code, and be-
cause he is such a student of it, he understands this lengthy document better than
anyone I know. Most CPAs focus on a very small part of the tax code. They focus
on the part that lets you and most Americans defer taxes until retirement—the
code relating to IRAs, 401(k)s, and other so-called retirement plans. Tom also pays
close attention to the other, much lengthier part of the code that shows you how to
reduce or eliminate your taxes permanently. The difference between Tom and
other CPAs is that Tom understands the purpose of the tax code. It’s not just a set
of rules. It’s a document that when followed is designed to reward certain behaviors
through lowering or eliminating taxes. Does your CPA see the tax code this way?
I consider Tom to be a very moral and ethical man. He is very religious, raised
in the Mormon faith. While I am not Mormon, I do share many of the values of
the Mormon religion—values such as tithing, giving at least 10 percent to spiritual
matters, and dedicating a number of years as a missionary. While I have never
1Tom WHEELWRIGHT
The Business of Real Estate
5
been a religious missionary, I have spent nearly ten years as a military missionary:
a Marine Corps pilot in Vietnam, serving my country.
One important lesson I have learned from Tom and others of the Mormon faith
is the saying, “God does not need to receive, but humans need to give.” This reminds
me of the importance of being generous. It is my opinion that greed rather than
generosity has taken over the world. Every time I meet someone who is short of
money, or if I am short of money, I am reminded to be generous and to give what I
would like to get. For example, if I want money, I need to give money. Having
been out of money a number of times in my life, I have had to remind myself to
give money at times when I needed money the most. Today I make a point of do-
nating regularly to charities and causes that are dear to my heart. My opinion is,
if I cannot personally work at a cause near to my heart, then my money needs to
work there for me. Going further, if I want kindness, then I need to give more
kindness. If I want a smile, then I need to first give a smile. And if I want a punch
in the mouth, then all I have to do is throw the first one.
I asked my friend Tom Wheelwright to be a part of this book not only because
he is a smart accountant—a team player that anyone who wants to be rich needs
to add to his his team—but also because he comes from a generous and sound
philosophical background.
Tom is a smart CPA who is an advocate of investing in real estate. Why? Be-
cause he knows that tax laws reward real estate investors more than they reward
stock investors. He is a great teacher, a generous man, and, most importantly, a
friend I respect.
—Robert Kiyosaki
I was one of the fortunate few growing up. Unlike much of the rest of the
world—people who have been told to save their pennies and invest in mutual
funds—my parents taught me to invest in real estate and business. My father
had a printing business, and my mother handled their real estate portfolio.
So, it was natural that once I had received my education, both formal and
work related, I opened my own business. (I had a lot of education before I
finally opened my own business—a master’s degree in professional accounting,
thirteen years of experience with international accounting firms, as well as ex-
perience as the in-house tax advisor to a Fortune 1000 company. I was a little
slow to realize the power of business.) When I started my accounting firm, I
did it like most people: I worked all hours of the day and rarely took a vacation.
6 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
When I did take a vacation, I still took calls from clients and colleagues. After
all, business never rests, so why should I?
Several years into my business, we had experienced significant growth, but I
was still working day and night and never taking a real vacation. And outside of
my business, I had no substantial assets. That’s when I read Rich Dad Poor Dad
and first met Robert Kiyosaki. He helped me realize that I was thinking about
business all wrong. It was not about how hard I worked, but rather about how
smart I worked.
Like many of you, my first real experience with Robert was at a Rich Dad
seminar. There I was, sitting next to my business partner, Ann Mathis, and her
husband, Joe. Robert was talking about a subject near and dear to my heart—
the tax benefits of real estate. Out of the blue, Robert asked me to come up to
the front of the room to explain the tax benefits of depreciation, introducing
me as his “other accountant.”
I had come to learn about Robert Kiyosaki and Rich Dad only a few months
earlier. One of my good friends, George Duck, had become the chief financial
officer at Rich Dad and had introduced us. I’m not sure who was more nervous
that first time I went on stage, Robert or me. Can you imagine putting an ac-
countant on stage? Robert had no idea that I had spent my life teaching in one
capacity or another, but he took the chance and put me up there anyway. This
began a long and inspiring relationship between us, and it really launched my
journey toward financial freedom.
I remember one of the first times Robert and I worked together. He used me
as “muscle.” That’s right, he used his accountant as his muscle. Robert had been
asked by a reporter to give an interview for the business section of the Arizona
Republic. The primary topic was how Robert could claim that he routinely re-
ceived 40 percent returns on his investments.
I went as the authoritative backup to Robert’s ideas. After all, someone might
not believe a marketing genius (i.e., Robert) when he says he gets these levels
of returns, but who wouldn’t believe an accountant? When it comes to investing,
numbers are everything, and who better to support the numbers than someone
who spends his life documenting, reviewing, and analyzing them?
That was one of the first opportunities I had to explain the benefits of lever-
age that comes from real estate. Not long before, I had started my own real
estate investing. You would think that with parents who were real estate in-
vestors, that I, too, would become a real estate investor. I had even spent my ca-
reer helping real estate investors and developers reduce their tax burdens.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 7
Not so. I didn’t actually begin investing in real estate until after the first time
I played Robert’s game, CASHFLOW 101®. This game had a powerful impact
on me. I saw, with my own eyes, the power of leverage in real estate. The game
was so powerful that the next day after playing the game, I called one of my
clients who had been investing in real estate for several years and asked him to
meet with me to show me how I could begin my own real estate investing.
And then I began making serious changes to my business. My partner, Ann, a
systems genius, created the systems, policies, and procedures in our firm so we
could focus on running the business and not working in the business. It took a
few years, but eventually we were able to step away from working for hourly
professional fees and instead supervise and grow a business that worked without
us.
Now, I can take three weeks off each year with no e-mail or phone access, as
I did just recently when I took my oldest son on a trip to the châteaux region of
northern France. I didn’t have to worry about my accounting firm or my real
estate investments while I was gone because they were both running without
my daily attention.
Real estate investing is a business and should be run like a business.
Robert talks a lot about the CASHFLOW Quadrant, with each labeled as E,
S, B, and I. He emphasizes that we need to move out of the E (employee) and S
(self employed) quadrants and into the B (business) and I (investor) quadrants.
I have learned to take this one step further. That is, to move all I-quadrant in-
vesting into the B quadrant.
Think about what you could do with the time you would have if you didn’t
have to worry about tenants, repairs, and cash flow. How would it feel to elimi-
nate the frustration that comes from constantly watching your real estate in-
vestments and worrying about if a tenant might call you in the middle of the
night with a problem? You can eliminate all of this stress and free up hundreds
of hours of your time simply by running your real estate investments as a B-
quadrant business.
TIP
8 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
FIGURE 1.1 I’ve learned to take the quadrant a step further and
free up hundreds of hours of my time simply by running my real
estate investments like a B-quadrant business.
It’s really not that difficult. You simply have to start acting like a business
and apply fundamental business principles to your real estate investing.
Business Principle No. 1: Strategy
Every business has to have a plan. Your real estate investing business is no dif-
ferent. A strategy is simply a systematic plan of action designed to accomplish
specific goals. There are seven simple steps to creating a successful strategy.
Step 1: Imagine
Begin your strategy with goals. Imagine where you would like your real estate
investing to take you. It may be a white sand beach in the Caribbean, unlimited
time with your family, or working for your favorite charity. My favorite places
in the world are Hawai’i, France, Arizona, and Park City, Utah. So my dream is
to own a house in each of these locations.
Don’t be afraid of being too aggressive. These are your dreams, after all, not
some number that is artificially imposed by a financial advisor. Our clients fre-
quently have dreams of financial freedom in as few as five to ten years. And
with a good strategy in place, anyone can be financially free in less than ten
years if they just start by applying these few basic business principles to their
real estate investing. So far, after six years of investing, I now have houses in
Hawai’i, Arizona, and Park City. France is on the agenda for next year. Pretty
aggressive goals, but I have been able to reach them in six short years by apply-
ing basic business principles to my real estate and business.
Step 2: Financial Goals
Determine what it will take to realize these dreams in terms of wealth and cash
flow. And commit to a date for accomplishing this goal. Then write down what
you currently have available in terms of investable assets less the liabilities.
This is your current wealth (also called net worth).
Step 3: Cash Flow Target
Of course, you will need to figure out the amount of wealth that it will take in
order to create your desired cash flow. A simple rule of thumb for calculating
this number is to multiply your desired cash flow by twenty. For me, I needed
$5 million in order to create an after-tax cash flow of $250,000 each year.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 9
Step 4: Current Wealth
Once you have your dream firmly in mind, the next step is to identify where
you are today. When considering where you are today, list only your real assets,
that is, those that are available to invest. Don’t list your car or your jewelry. But
do list the amount of equity in your home if it can be made available for investing
through a home equity loan. Here is an example of what I mean:
These first four steps are the essence of a process referred to as “dreamlin-
ing,” and I will use a simple illustration to show you what I mean. Here is what
my dreamline looked like when I first met Robert and started down my road to
financial freedom.
Step 5: Vision, Mission, and Values
After you have your dreamline in place, you can make a plan to reach those
dreams. This plan should include your vision, mission and values, the type of
real estate you will specialize in buying, and the criteria you use for choosing
your real estate investments.
10 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
July 1, this year July 1, 5 years
1 million investable
Net Worth
$250,000 Cash Flow
$5,000,000 Net Worth
Wealth Strategy
TABLE 1.1
Liquid: Long-Term:
Savings Loans
Stocks & Bonds Real Estate
Mutual Funds Oil & Gas
CDs Business
Other Intellectual
Other Other
Sub-Total: Sub-Total:
FIGURE 1.2 Tom’s “Dreamline” When He First Met Robert Kiyosaki
At this point, you may be wondering if I have truly lost my mind. After all,
aren’t vision, mission, and value statements only for true businesses? Exactly!
And your real estate investments are a true business. At least they should be if
you are going to reach your dreams in the shortest amount of time possible and
with the least amount of work.
When creating your vision, remember that this represents your focus for the
future, that is, what you want your life to look like when everything is in place.
Your mission is simply a statement of how you are going to go about your in-
vesting business. And your values are the values that you insist everyone you
work with in real estate share with you.
Tom’s Personal
Vision, Mission, and Values
Vision. My vision for financial freedom means having the time and resources to do
what I want, when I want. I know I have reached financial freedom when I can travel
anytime I desire, spend quality time with family and friends, and go on missions for
my church.
Mission. My mission to reach financial freedom is to invest in highly appreciating sin-
gle-family homes by researching foreclosures, borrowing from banks and sellers, hold-
ing properties for five to ten years, and obtaining tax leverage through depreciation.
Values. My values are these: abundance—recognizing that there are plenty of re-
sources and real estate deals to go around; caring—being kind and expressing grat-
itude; learning—taking the time to grow and improve my real estate knowledge;
and respect—treating others the way I want to be treated.
Step 6: Investment Niche
Once you have your vision, mission, and values in place, you can begin looking
at what type of real estate makes sense for you. Every successful business owner
knows that you are always most successful when you focus your attention on
something you enjoy doing and for which you have a natural ability. At my com-
pany, ProVision, we have a variety of tools we use to help people figure out
which type of real estate they will enjoy the most—multifamily, commercial,
industrial, raw land or single-family homes. My personal investment niche re-
mains highly appreciating single-family homes.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 11
Step 7: Criteria
The final step in your strategy—determining your investment criteria—is some-
thing that few people take time to do. And yet, if you can determine your in-
vestment criteria as part of your strategy, you can avoid a lot of headaches,
stress, and wasted time. You can also avoid making costly mistakes. And you
will save a considerable amount of time and energy, enabling you to focus on
only those investments that meet your criteria. As an example, here are my per-
sonal investment criteria:
You may be asking why you need to spend so much time and effort developing
a strategy. We teach our ProVision clients about the importance of strategy by
playing CASHFLOW 101® with them in a very specific way. If you have played
the game, you realize that, on average, it will take two and a half hours. We in-
struct our clients that their team (the players at their table) must spend the
first thirty minutes developing a strategy to win the game. This strategy includes
the type of assets they will invest in and their criteria for investing. All members
of their team, though playing as individuals, must follow the strategy precisely.
The result is astonishing. Each player gets out of the Rat Race and wins the
game in less than two hours. So even though they have spent an enormous per-
centage of their allotted time developing their strategy (roughly 20 percent),
they finish substantially earlier than they would have without their strategy.
This happens every time, so long as each team member adheres to the strategy.
Business Principle No. 2: Team
Just as every good business has a strategy, every successful business owner has
a very carefully chosen team of individuals and companies to help him/her
12 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 1.2 Tom’s Personal Investment Criteria
Criteria Decision
Minimum appreciation 10%
Minimum rate of return 50%
Cash flow or cash on cash return -0-
Price range $200,000-$600,000
Maximum amount of investment/deal $80,000
Maximum time commitment 5 hours per month
Location of investment Western U.S.
Price as a % of value 85%
succeed. Your team will add considerable leverage to your investing. You can
take advantage of your team members’ time, talents, contacts, knowledge, and
resources.
Tips for Building a Team
Plan. Think carefully about what skills you need on your team. For example,
you are going to need an attorney, an accountant, a banker, at least one property
manager, and others. Decide on the skill sets you need before you decide on
which people will fill those roles.
Referrals. The best team members almost always come as a referral from some-
one you trust. But make sure the person referring is also a real estate investor
and is knowledgeable about your situation and needs. A trusted advisor, such
as an attorney, accountant, mentor or wealth coach, can be a good source of
referrals.
Agreements. Make sure you have good, clear agreements in place with each of
your team members so they know what is expected of them and what they can
expect from you.
Before we leave the concept of a team, let me give you my personal experi-
ence with developing a real estate team. Anyone who knows me realizes that I
spend most of my day growing my business. This doesn’t leave me much time
for real estate investing. But I love real estate investing and understand com-
pletely the importance of it in my wealth strategy.
I estimate the time I spend each week on real estate to be no more than one
hour. Yet, I make in excess of $100,000 per month through my real estate in-
vesting, all because I have developed a great team and applied the other business
principles we are talking about in this chapter. This brings me to our next prin-
ciple: accounting.
Business Principle No. 3: Accounting
You may wonder if I include accounting as a basic principle of business because
of my accounting background. While I have to admit to a natural bias in favor
of good accounting, I believe that if you were to ask one hundred successful
business owners if good accounting (including good reporting) were critical to
their business, at least ninety-five of them would agree.
Why? Because good accounting leads to good reporting, and good reporting
leads to good decisions. If you don’t have the information you need, how are
you going to make good decisions, such as when you should sell a piece of real
estate or how to know if your portfolio is producing the desired results?
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 13
Great entrepreneurs understand the purpose of accounting. Here are a few
of my personal keys to great accounting.
Key No. 1: Purposeful Accounting
Accounting should never be done solely (or even mainly) to satisfy the IRS or
other regulators. Accounting’s primary purpose should be to provide accurate
and useful information so that you can make the best decisions. Poor investors
think that the only reason to keep records is so their accountant can prepare
their tax return at the end of the year.
This is a huge mistake. Good accounting is critical to good decision making.
Without current, accurate numbers, how are you going to make the decision to
buy, sell, or refinance your property? And how will you know which property is
doing well and which is doing poorly? You won’t even know if your property
manager is doing a good job or not.
Several years ago, Ann and I purchased a group of fourplexes in Mesa, Ari-
zona. The price was good based on the information we had at the time. We kept
14 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: My Team Took Care of It All
So how do I make time for real estate? You guessed it—I have a terrific team.
They are so good, in fact, that the only time I have to spend is to quickly review
reports, make decisions (which are pretty easy, since I have very well-defined in-
vestment criteria), and sign documents. I remember one time recently when I was
speaking to my team leader and he informed me that a tenant had vacated a house
unexpectedly and not turned off the water. My team leader, who is not the property
manager, drops by all of my houses on a regular basis and noticed that the tenant
had left. He rushed into the house only to discover that the pipes had broken (this
was in Utah in the dead of winter), and the house was flooded. The cost of repair
was in the neighborhood of $50,000.
My team leader immediately took action. After turning the water off, he called
the property manager and the insurance agent. He arranged for the repair company
to renovate the property, made sure the insurance accepted the claim (before
spending any money), and went after the property manager and tenant for any
damages not paid for by the insurance company. I did not have to worry about a
thing. And I probably spent only thirty minutes total dealing with this mess (signing
authorizations and talking to my team leader).
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 15
very close track of the cash flow and the income from these properties. But
after a year or so, it became clear to us that these properties were not going to
generate positive cash flow in the near future. At the same time, we noticed
that cap rates (see Principle No. 4, p. 17) were going down. So, based on our
numbers, we sold the fourplexes. Because of the decrease in cap rates, we were
able to make a significant profit, and we stopped losing money each month.
Key No. 2: Accurate Bookkeeping
While good accounting should go far beyond mere bookkeeping, it begins with
accurate and appropriate bookkeeping entries. Accurate bookkeeping is the ba-
sis for creating useful reports and analysis.
Bookkeeping is merely the process of entering the results of transactions
into a record that can be used for reporting and analysis. I suggest to most of
my clients that they outsource their bookkeeping to their accountant or some
other professional bookkeeping service. For those who want to do it themselves,
I recommend using a very simple accounting software program, such as Quick-
books.
Key No. 2a: Chart of Accounts
Begin by setting up a chart of accounts (this is just a list of the accounts you are
going to use to classify your receipts and expenditures). The accounts you use
should be those that make the most sense to you. For example, one person may
list printer paper as an office supply while another may list it in the more general
category of office expense. It’s simply a matter of how detailed you want your
reporting to be. Just remember that if you did not create an account for it, you
cannot create a report for it.
Here’s a little trick for you: You don’t have to create a separate chart
of accounts for every property. Instead, you can create a “class” for each
property. This allows you to do all of the bookkeeping for your real estate
business in one Quickbooks “company” while creating the detail and report
options that you need in order to understand what is happening with each
property.
If you need help setting up your chart of accounts, ask your accountant/
CPA—a critical member of your team—to lend you a hand. This person should
be happy to help, and can do this fairly quickly for you.
TIP
Key No. 2b: Detailed Data Entry
Once you have your chart of accounts set up, you are ready to begin entering
your data. Remember that you need to enter the details of every transaction.
Most transactions will have some cash involved, so if you enter the details every
time you receive or spend money, you probably will catch 98 percent of your
transactions. Some transactions don’t have cash involved, such as recording de-
preciation expense. These are done through journal entries. Since you will likely
have some journal entries to do, I will give you a brief explanation of how to do
these.
Understand that every transaction has two sides to it for accounting pur-
poses; a debit side and a credit side (think left and right so the total of the left
side always equals the total of the right side). Expenditures are always a debit
to the expense, income, or asset account (left side), and a credit to cash (right
side). Receipts are always a credit to an income, expense, or liability account
(left side), and a debit to cash (right side). To increase an expense or an asset,
you debit that account, and to increase income or a liability, you credit that
account.
Key No. 2c: Journal Entries
When you enter a receipt or an expenditure into Quickbooks, the software au-
tomatically creates both the debit and the credit. But sometimes you will need
to make a correction or adjustment to your books when there has not been a
cash transaction. You do this with a journal entry. When you make a journal
entry, you simply enter both a credit and a debit. Let’s use our depreciation
journal entry as an example, since everyone has to make this journal entry at
least once a year:
Debit to Depreciation Expense in the amount of depreciation calculated for
the period (usually based on tables provided by the Internal Revenue Service or
your accountant). See page 26 for more details about the Magic of Depreciation.
Credit to Accumulated Depreciation in the same amount (this account is an
offset to the asset account for the asset you are depreciating, such as a building).
See? It’s simple.
Key No. 3: Consistency
Learn to use the correct accounts, and use the same accounts for all similar re-
ceipts and expenditures. If you decide to put paper costs into office supplies,
always put purchases of paper into office supplies. Don’t put them into the
office supply account one month and the office expense account the next month.
16 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Key No. 4: Frequency
Do your bookkeeping no less than once a week. Two problems happen when
you get behind. First, it becomes overwhelming, and you will tend to continue
putting it off until the end of the year when it becomes urgent for your tax re-
turns. This creates the second problem: Not having up-to-date bookkeeping
means you cannot get good reports to make good decisions.
Key No. 5: Online Banking
Personally, I do my bookkeeping every Friday morning. It takes me less than
one hour because I use the systems that are available to me, such as online
banking and automatic bill pay. Quickbooks will automatically classify all of my
online banking to the right accounts with a few clicks of the mouse. I actually
find it quicker to do the bookkeeping myself using these systems than if I were
to use an outside bookkeeper (I tried that once and found it took me more time
to correct the bookkeeping than if I just did it myself using online banking).
The next principle I’m going to share with you is how to get good reports
from your bookkeeping software. If you review these reports each month, you
will be able to make good decisions about your real estate business quickly and
effectively.
Business Principle No. 4: Reporting
All successful entrepreneurs understand the importance of managing their busi-
ness by metrics. Metrics is simply a measurement of the day-to-day results of the
business. Sometimes these measurements are raw numbers, such as cash flow.
Other times they take the form of ratios. And still other times these measurements
are comparisons, either to a previous period, to targets, or industry averages.
If you don’t know your numbers, you don’t know your business.
Report No. 1: Statement of Cash Flows
Let’s start with the king of all raw numbers: cash flow. Unfortunately, it’s rare
that a real estate investor has a clear picture of his/her true cash flow. You should
know the cash flow from each property as well as the overall cash flow for your
real estate business.
There is a tendency among real estate investors to believe that all they need to
know about cash flow is the difference in their bank account from the beginning
of the month to the end of the month. But the real key to using cash flow as a tool
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 17
is to understand where the cash came from and where it went. A standard ac-
counting report that you can use to figure this out is the Statement of Cash Flows.
This report, though rarely used among real estate investors, is the most important
report of all.
It begins with operating income. Operating income includes rents minus nor-
mal cash expenses, including repairs, maintenance, and management fees. It
then details nonoperating items such as financing transactions and investing
transactions. Financing transactions include any money that flows to or from
your business because of loans. These include your mortgage payments as well
as any loans you take out or money you put it. Investing transactions include any
money that flows to or from your business because of investing activities. These
include down payments on properties and cash from the sale of a property.
The end result is the increase or decrease in the amount of cash you have at
the end of the period (month, quarter, or year) compared to what you had at
the beginning of the period. This report makes it clear how much of your posi-
tive or negative cash flow is coming from operations versus other activities,
such as financing or investing. Wouldn’t it be great to know this and be able to
18 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 1.3 Tom’s Statement of Cash Flow
Property A Oct - Dec
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net Income -6,706.40
Adjustments to reconcile Net Income
to net cash provided by operations:
Escrow Accounts -174.40
Security Deposits 800.00
Net cash provided by Operating Activities -6,080.80
INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Accumulated depreciation 6,790.00
Accumulated amortization 18.00
Net cash provided by Investing Activities 6,808.00
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Mortgage Payable -258.34
Net cash provided by Financing Activities -258.34
Net cash increase for period 468.86
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 19
TABLE 1.4 Most Common Ratios Used to Analyze Property Results
Ratio Numerator Denominator Tells You
Cap rate Net Operating
Income
Property
Value
How much the
property is earning
ROI Annual increase in value
plus income Cash invested Total return
Cash on Cash
return
Net cash from
investment after taxes Cash invested Cash return
Current ratio Current assets Current
liabilities
Ability to pay
liabilities
Debt/equity ratio Total debt Net Equity Leverage
Return on
assets
Net operating
income Total assets Profitability
Debt coverage Net operating
income
Annual debt
service
Ability to service debt
from cash flow
Loan to value (LTV) Debt Value of Property Leverage
Internal Rate
of Return (IRR) Complex formula Average annual
return on investment
find out this information at any time? Table 1.3 is an example of a statement of
cash flows for one of my properties. I pulled this report directly from my Quick-
books.
This report tells me several things about this property. First, it tells me there
was positive cash flow. Second, it tells me that there was a loss for tax purposes
(net income was negative), producing additional cash flow for me through de-
preciation. Third, it tells me that I paid down my mortgage by $258, which is
an additional benefit to me. If all I knew was that my cash had increased by
$468 for the period, I would never have learned these other important benefits
from this property and may have thought the property wasn’t doing too well.
Report No. 2: Ratio Analysis
While raw numbers are helpful to know, serious analysis of your real estate
business comes from ratios and comparisons. A list of the most common ratios
used to analyze your results is found in Table 1.4.
Two of the most important ratios are the cap rate on your properties
and your return on investment (ROI).
TIP
Ratio No. 1: Cap Rate
Your cap rate (or capitalization rate) is simply your net operating income di-
vided by the value of your property. Remember that this figure represents the
value of the property, not the cost of the property. Let’s look at an example.
Suppose your property produces $10,000 per month in rent, or $120,000 for
the year. And suppose your operating expenses (remember, this doesn’t include
mortgage interest or principal payments, or depreciation) are $70,000. This
means that your net operating income (NOI) is $50,000. If your property is
worth $500,000, then your cap rate is 10 percent.
You can use this information to make decisions. Let’s suppose
that you have a loan on the property with a 7 percent interest rate. If your
cap rate goes below 7 percent, then you need to think about selling the
property. Why? Because now you have what is called “negative leverage.”
Negative leverage occurs when your return is less than you are paying
on your loan. At this point, it is actually costing you money to borrow
because the cap rate is lower than your borrowing rate.
When Ann and I sold our fourplexes in Mesa, the cap rate had dipped down
around 5 percent. The interest rate on our mortgage was 6.5 percent. So we
were now into negative leverage. On top of that, we had negative cash flow. So
it was time to sell the properties. And we did so at a substantial profit because
we watched the cap rate. When we purchased the properties, the cap rate was
around 10 percent. Though our net operating income never increased, our prop-
erty value doubled simply because of the cap rate decreasing from 10 percent
to 5 percent.
Ratio No. 2: ROI
Another ratio we review is Return on Investment, or ROI. This ratio tells us
how a property is doing overall. It’s critical to review this ratio on a regular
basis. I know several investors who calculate expected ROI when buying a prop-
erty but never again. Like the cap rate, your ROI can tell you if you should be
holding on to the property or if you need to do something different with the
property.
For example, one of my criteria for investing is an after-tax return of at least
30 percent. This includes cash flow from the property and the appreciation on
the property plus my tax benefits from the property and principal reduction
TIP
20 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
on my mortgage. A few years ago, I bought a property in Utah that looked like
it would have an ROI of 35 percent over a five-year period. But it turned out
that the property was very difficult to rent, so the ROI was less than expected.
Once it was clear the ROI was going to fall below my 30 percent requirement, I
sold the property and found another property that better fit my investment cri-
teria. It should be obvious to you by now that a lot depends on coming up with
the appropriate investment criteria. Many of your decisions will be based on
these.
Working through your numbers and applying them to your criteria is where
another member of your team—your wealth coach—will be critical. Everyone
should have a coach for his/her business. Your coach should be someone well
versed in real estate and in overall wealth strategies. Go to www.ProVision
Wealth.com/wealthstrategies.asp for more information on wealth coaching.
Report No. 3: Comparison Reports
The third type of reporting is comparison reporting. Comparison reports take
the actual data from your real estate business and compare it to some other
data, such as industry standards, past performance, or expected/budgeted per-
formance. Let’s suppose that when you bought your property, you expected
that it would appreciate 10 percent per year. Suppose the actual appreciation is
15 percent.
Your appreciation report should show you not only your current apprecia-
tion, but also your expected appreciation and perhaps the average appreciation
in the market. This gives you a good idea of how you are doing compared to the
market and to your own expectations and whether you might want to consider
buying more property in that market or selling what you have so you can buy
other property that better meets your criteria.
Can you see how important it is to have good reports? It’s not just the raw
data you want; it’s also the ratios and the comparisons. One of my biggest com-
plaints about many property managers is that they produce terrible reports. Typ-
ically, they give you only the raw data, and frequently even that is impossible to
understand. Let me show you the type of report my property manager gives me.
While it doesn’t give me any analysis, at least it gives me the data in a way I
can create my own analysis. I can see immediately that I have positive cash
flow, which meets my criteria. I now need to take this information and put it
into my reporting system (Quickbooks or something similar), and from that
system I can create reports that give me cap rates, ROI, and other analyses.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 21
Business Principle No. 5: Taxes
If you want to make an immediate impact on the return on your real estate, you
need to pay close attention to tax laws.
The fastest way to increase your ROI on a property is to take advantage
of the tax laws in place to encourage real estate investment.
The single biggest expense for most people is taxes. In the United States,
which is routinely considered to be a low-tax country, the average business
owner earning $100,000 pays more than 50 percent of his earnings to the gov-
ernment in some form of taxes. These include income taxes, property taxes,
transfer taxes, sales taxes, employment taxes, and excise taxes, not to mention
estate taxes.
Some ancient civilizations equated a 50 percent tax to being in bondage. Yet
here we are in the twenty-first century paying more than 50 percent of our in-
come in taxes and accepting this as okay. The good news is that if you are in
business, and particularly if that business is real estate investment, you can eas-
ily lower this rate from 50 percent to 20 or 30 percent. In fact, many of our
clients at ProVision who are serious real estate investors legally pay no income
tax at all.
Think about what you could do with the extra money you would have if you
reduced your income taxes by even 20 or 30 percent. How much more real es-
tate could you buy? How much faster would your portfolio grow? I once calcu-
lated that someone in the 30 percent tax bracket could double his investment
portfolio over seven years if he simply maximized his tax benefits from real es-
tate and reinvested these savings into his portfolio.
TIP
22 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 1.5 Real Life Example of
a Good Property Report
Property Address Lease Rate: $1200/mo
Rent Collected: $1200.00
Less 8% Management Fee: $96.00
Expenses-HOA Fee: $105.00
Amount to Owner $999.00
Mortgage Payment: $987.90
March 2009 Cashflow: $11.10 +
April 2009 Projection: $999.00
When I tell people that they can legally reduce their income tax by 30 percent
or more, they are immediately skeptical. They think I must be getting my clients
into some tax shelter. They are correct. That tax shelter is real estate investing.
And it doesn’t matter whether it is residential, commercial, or industrial prop-
erty. In the United States and many other countries, real estate is a highly fa-
vored investment under the tax laws.
In the United States and many other countries, real estate is a highly
favored investment under the tax laws.
So let’s talk about what you can do to receive the maximum tax benefit from
your real estate. We will focus on the laws of the United States, but keep in
mind that many other countries have similar laws. So even if you don’t invest in
the United States, these tax reduction principles may apply to your real estate
investments in Canada, Europe, or other areas of the world. Here are five ways
to reduce your income tax by 30 percent or more.
Tip No. 1: Tax Strategy
What? A tax strategy? Didn’t we just talk about creating a business strategy for
our real estate earlier in this chapter? And now we are going to create a tax
strategy? That’s right. A tax strategy: a systematic plan of action for permanently
reducing or eliminating income taxes.
A good tax strategy is like a good business strategy in many ways. You have
to look at the big picture, including not only your real estate but also any other
businesses and investments you own. And you have to look at it from a long-
term perspective. My personal tax strategy includes aspects relating to my two
sons. One of my sons, Sam, works in both of my businesses and wants to be in-
volved for many years to come. My other son, Max, has no interest in business
and wants to write children’s books. So my tax strategy keeps my sons’ interests
in mind. They both own parts of my business, but I have to structure their own-
ership differently, since one is actively involved and the other is not.
Many of our clients work together as a couple on their business. My wife, on
the other hand, has no interest in business per se and is interested in helping
me only with the speaking part of my business (she is a wonderful speaker and
entertainer). So my tax strategy cannot, for example, include my wife as a real
estate professional.
A good tax strategist could really help here. So, another team member
for you is a tax advisor who specializes in tax strategies.
TIP
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 23
Your tax strategy needs to be a plan that you can readily accomplish without
making life too complicated. Of course, a good tax strategist could really help
here. So, another team member for you is a tax advisor who specializes in tax
strategies.
Tip No. 2: Entity Structure
Which type of entity should you use? Should you use a limited liability company
(LLC), a corporation, or a partnership? Or should you avoid using an entity at
all? In some countries, where there is not a lot of litigation, you may not need a
separate entity for your real estate. But in the United States, where 95 percent
of lawsuits worldwide are filed, the proper entity is essential. Let’s look at a
quick overview of the tax entities available in the United States.
While every person’s situation is different, let me give you a few pointers
about which entity you may want to consider for holding your real estate in-
vestments. From an asset protection standpoint (discussed in detail in another
chapter of this book), LLCs are frequently the best entity to use. One of the
great things about LLCs is that they don’t have any tax consequence. You can
elect to tax an LLC anyway you want. An LLC can be treated as a sole propri-
etorship, a partnership, an S corporation, or a C corporation.
For most real estate rental properties, you will want to be taxed either as a
partnership or a sole proprietorship. Don’t make the mistake of putting your real
estate rentals into an S corporation or a C corporation. This could spell disaster
if you ever have to take the property out of the corporation to refinance it; you
will be taxed as if the corporation sold the property to you at its fair market
value. I had someone in my office recently who owned his investment property
in an S corporation. We estimated the tax cost of refinancing to be in the neigh-
borhood of $250,000 simply because of the entity structure.
24 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Business Structures
Partnership
General Limited
Sole
Proprietorship Corporation
S C
FIGURE 1.3 Overview of Entities
Don’t make the mistake of putting your real estate rentals into an
S corporation or a C corporation. This could spell disaster if you ever have to
take the property out of the corporation to refinance it; you will be taxed as
if the corporation sold the property to you at its fair market value.
If you are a real estate dealer or developer, you may want to consider S cor-
poration taxation. This includes those of you who want to fix and flip properties.
The reason? You can significantly lower your social security taxes by owning
your property in an S corporation. And since you probably won’t need to dis-
tribute the property out of the company except when you sell it, you won’t have
the bad income tax consequences I spoke of earlier.
Tip No. 3: Travel, Meals, and Entertainment
Remember that the United States and most other countries tax only the net in-
come from a business. So any expenses that you can treat as deductible expenses
lower your income tax. The most overlooked deductions in the real estate busi-
ness are travel, meals, and entertainment expenses. The rule in the United States
for meals and entertainment is that if you discuss business before, during, or
after the meal or entertainment and the discussion is necessary and ordinary
for your business, then you get to deduct the cost of the meal or entertainment.
I’m not talking about going to dinner with your real estate agent or your ac-
countant (though I’m sure they would appreciate it). I’m talking about going to
dinner or a sporting event with your partner. For most of you, your business
partner in real estate is your spouse. My experience with business owners is
that when they go to dinner with their spouses they almost always talk about
business. And if you and your spouse are working on the real estate business
together, I can virtually guarantee that you are talking about your real estate
every time you go out to eat.
My wife and I eat out once or twice a week on average. I cannot even re-
member the last time we had dinner out and did not discuss business. These
discussions are essential to our success as business owners, even though she
does not maintain a very active role in any of our businesses. She has a perspec-
tive, though, that I find extremely useful as I make business decisions.
So stop paying for your meals out of your personal bank account, and start
paying for them from your real estate business bank account.
Travel is a little more difficult to deduct, but not much. If you are traveling
within the United States, you simply have to prove that your primary reason
for the trip was business. You prove this by showing that you spent more than
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 25
50 percent of each eight-hour workday discussing or working on your real estate
investment business. This could include your annual meeting or you could sim-
ply be investigating real estate opportunities in that location.
We had one client who applied these principles and ended up with a $1 mil-
lion deal. He really liked to travel to New Mexico. Knowing that he had to look
at real estate to deduct his travel expense, he set up a meeting with a local real
estate agent to review land development opportunities in his vacation spot. He
ended up finding a deal that netted him $1 million. And, of course, he got to
deduct his travel expenses.
Tip No. 4: Depreciation
After Robert and I met with the Arizona Republic journalist to discuss 40 per-
cent returns, we walked across the street to have lunch at a local restaurant.
Robert asked me what I thought about depreciation. I told him I thought it was
like magic. Where else can you get a tax deduction for something you didn’t
pay for and that is appreciating in value? Yet that is exactly what happens with
depreciation in the United States, Canada, and many other countries. Here’s
how it works:
Say you pay $500,000 for a house that you are going to rent. You put $100,000
of your own money into the house, and the bank loans you $400,000. You get a
deduction for a portion of the cost of the house each year—not just a portion of
your $100,000, but of the entire purchase price. Let me show you the calculation
for U.S. tax purposes.
Let’s estimate that 20 percent (or $100,000) of the cost of the house was for
the land. Even the IRS recognizes that land does not wear out, so we don’t get
to depreciate the land. But we do get to depreciate the remaining $400,000. At
a minimum for residential property, we should get a deduction of 3.636 percent
or $14,545 each year. And that’s assuming that the entire $400,000 is allocated
to the building. You can increase this deduction by doing what’s called a cost
segregation or chattel appraisal.
Briefly, here is what happens in a cost segregation. Your accountant or his
engineer goes through your property and segregates (on paper) everything that
could easily be removed from the building and is not necessary for its basic op-
eration from the building itself. Those items that can be removed are called
personal property or chattels. Personal property can be depreciated at 20 per-
cent or more per year.
In our case, let’s suppose that $100,000 of costs is segregated from the build-
ing. This would increase our annual depreciation deduction from $14,545 to
26 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
$30,900—more than double. So while our property appreciates, we still get a
tax deduction for depreciation of more than $30,000. This is the best of all de-
ductions, since there is no cash outlay involved other than the down payment
on the property.
So if our cash flow is $30,900 or less, we will not pay any income tax on our
monthly cash flow. And if our cash flow is less than our depreciation, then we
create a tax loss from the property that we can use (with proper planning) to
offset income from other sources. This is the primary reason many real estate
investors are able to reduce their income tax by 30 percent or more and why
some real estate investors pay no income tax at all. See how this can increase
your return on investment?
Tip No. 5: Documentation
Last but not least, let’s talk briefly about the importance of properly document-
ing our real estate transactions and expenses. Without good documentation,
the IRS has the right to disallow your deductions. What a waste of good deduc-
tions! We have already discussed the most important form of documentation—
good accounting.
In addition, there are other forms of documentation you must keep. For travel,
meals, and entertainment, you must keep receipts, and you must note who you
were with, where you went, what you discussed, the date of the event, and why
you incurred the expense. For automobile deductions, you need to maintain a
log of business versus personal miles driven. And for your entities, you need to
write down minutes that detail all of your meetings and major transactions.
Documentation is not the most fun part of real estate, but it’s not too difficult
if you just take a few minutes a week to take care of it. Stay on top of it. If you
don’t know exactly what you need to document, consult with your tax preparer.
Remember that if it isn’t documented, then you probably cannot prove to the
IRS that it was a legitimate deduction.
So there you have it—five easy opportunities to reduce your income taxes
while making tons of money in your real estate business. Now you can see why
smart business owners include tax planning as one of their keys to success. Ap-
plying these basic principles to your real estate business will enable you to build
enormous wealth in a very short time. Remember to begin with a strategy, add
a team, maintain good accounting, regularly review your reports, and minimize
your taxes by creating a long-term tax strategy. The sooner you begin treating
your real estate investing as a real business, the sooner you can stop working so
hard and start reaping the profits that are there for all good real estate investors.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 27
Ways to Learn More
ProVision Wealth Strategy U—a free resource at www.ProVisionWealth.com/
WealthStrategyU
ProVision Business Start-up Kit—a series of five training modules on starting
up your real estate business. Includes courses on bookkeeping, year-round tax
planning, entity structuring, and setting up a business.
ProVision School of Wealth Strategy—a monthly subscription to compre-
hensive training materials on building wealth. Includes courses on creating
your wealth vision, building your wealth team, and designing your personal
wealth strategy.
ProVision School of Tax Strategy—a monthly subscription to comprehensive
training materials on permanently reducing taxes. Includes courses on design-
ing your family tax strategy, involving your children in your real estate business,
and getting the greatest tax benefits out of your real estate.
For more than twenty-five years, Tom Wheelwright has strategically de-
veloped innovative tax, business, and wealth strategies for sophisticated
investors and business owners across the United States and around the
world, resulting in millions of dollars in profits. His goal is to teach people
how to create a strategic and proactive approach to wealth that creates
lasting success. As the founder of ProVision, Tom is the innovator of
proactive consulting services for ProVision’s premium clientele, who on average, pay much
less in taxes and earn much more on their investments. He coaches select clients on their
wealth, business, and tax strategies; lectures on wealth and tax strategies around the world;
and is an adjunct professor at Arizona State University.
28 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Ifirst met Chuck Lotzar in 2001 or so when he was a senior partner in a national
law firm. At Chuck’s former law firm, I delivered a presentation to approxi-
mately ten attorneys that covered my rich dad’s philosophy on money, wealth cre-
ation, and wealth management. Chuck seemed to be the only one out of the ten
who understood or was interested in what I was saying.
In 2003, Kim and I used Chuck to finalize one of our biggest real estate invest-
ments. It was a zero-down deal that would put more than $30,000 a month net
income in our pockets. If not for Chuck, this deal could have been our biggest
nightmare. He found irregularities that most people, including most lawyers,
would have missed. On top of that, after the deal was closed, Chuck offered to give
us a discount on some of his firm’s legal fees since he felt his firm did not work as
effectively as it could have. Needless to say, we told him to bill us in full and keep
the money. He had more than earned it.
In 2007, Chuck again came to our rescue, this time as our personal attorney
against our former business partner. The lawsuit was the worst, most vile event in
Kim’s and my life. If not for Chuck, I do not know where Kim and I would be today.
The good news is that Chuck Lotzar has turned out to be far more than our real
estate attorney. Through Chuck’s guidance, the Rich Dad Company has emerged
stronger, better staffed, and much more profitable. Personally, I have emerged more
2Charles W. LOTZAR
A Real Estate Attorney’s View
of Assembling and Managing
Your Team
29
mature, wiser, and less of a hothead, which is a miracle. Chuck has not only made
Kim and me vastly richer; we have become better entrepreneurs and investors.
The lesson again is this: It is often through our worst deals with the worst
people that the best people emerge.
—Robert Kiyosaki
I know attorneys see the world differently than most people. A working rela-
tionship isn’t just a working relationship; it ideally should be a contract be-
tween two parties with built-in protections, limitations, and provisions, just in
case the relationship goes south. A piece of real estate isn’t just a piece of prop-
erty; it’s an asset that brings with it the need for appropriate entity structure,
identification of risk, allocation of risk, mitigation of risk and liabilities, and a
host of other legal protections and caveats associated with its development,
management, and eventual sale.
I know you’re thinking life is easier when you are not an attorney. You’re
probably right! But for me life as an attorney and particularly a real estate at-
torney is full of the excitement, the challenges, and the accomplishments that
can come only from working with people so that they sleep well at night, have
their family fortunes protected, and bring their dreams to life. It’s a profession
that keeps me continually learning, which I love. Real estate is a dynamic field
that keeps every day at the office new and fresh.
The likelihood that you are reading the chapter written by an attorney first
is slim, so I’ll assume you’ve read at least a few chapters before mine. If you
have, you’ve probably noticed that there are a number of references in them to
team members: the professionals it takes to make a real estate deal actually
happen. Many of the contributors list the types of team members that they need
in the type of real estate work that they do and how they have helped.
Well, I will echo their beliefs. Team members are the deciding factors in
spelling success or disaster for a real estate project. In my practice, I have seen
teams that operate seemingly effortlessly and others that are clumsy and doomed
to failure. So how do you assemble one that works effortlessly, and avoid the
kinds that are disasters waiting to happen? The answer is, you can’t. You can
only try to do your best and know that the reality of your team—particularly as
you are just starting out—will fall somewhere in the middle of those two ex-
tremes. Your job will be to assemble and manage a group of pros that makes its
way progressively more efficient to close every deal you do.
My perspective on teams and team members is different from the views of
many in this book because I am one of those team members. Many of the others
30 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
in this book are the investors who drive the team. They delegate to team mem-
bers who advise them. I’m the one they delegate to and who advises them on
how to lead the team. That gives me a slightly different perspective. Combine
that with my attorney’s perspective and you have a chapter with three primary
purposes:
1.To tell you who you need on your team and how to know you have a winner.
2.To identify known risks and make sure that they are properly allocated
among other writing parties, including the members of your team.
3.To establish performance measures and deadlines, and to follow up to make
sure that each of those performance measures and deadlines are met in a
timely manner.
See, this is where my lawyer’s mentality comes into play. I know your team
will not be perfect, no matter how perfectly you follow this book’s directions,
how well you interview potential team members, or how ironclad their refer-
ences were. Life and real estate deals are not that cut and dried. So what do you
do? Well, quite simply, you do your best on the front end, and you attempt to
protect yourself on the back end.
Three Rules of the Game
Before you say to yourself, “This team thing seems like more trouble than it is
worth. For my project, I’ll keep it simple and do most of the work I need alone.
I’ll keep the team small—as small as possible—and that will minimize my prob-
lems,” understand that it is very hard to do anything in real estate alone. It is a
team sport and as such, I have assembled my Three Rules of the Game.
Nowhere else will your team come into play more than when it is time to
perform your due diligence. It’s a necessary part of every real estate deal, and
with the right team it can be your best friend and actually a lot of fun because
you often find the hidden gems that can signal great opportunity. On the other
hand, it can be the beginnings of a vivid nightmare you are living because you
are the proud owner of a “problem-property,” thanks to a team that missed
something big during due diligence. Again, the first camp is the place to be.
You’ll recall that the due diligence period is usually not less than sixty days
in length. Its purpose is to discover any problems and opportunities with a
property to determine whether you want to go through with the transaction,
and if so with what specific stipulations. It’s also designed to allocate and alle-
viate risk among various parties: the buyer, the seller, the lender, and the various
third-party professionals on your team.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 31
As I mention in rule number two, when it comes to due diligence, you want a
team that will be willing to learn the truth about the property and tell you the
brutal facts. If your baby is ugly, you need professionals and advisors who aren’t
going to be afraid to tell you the truth to your face—before the acquisition takes
place. So let’s delve into the team members and their roles from a fellow team
member and a lawyer’s perspective.
Consider these your core team members, the ones you’ll need for virtually
every real estate deal you do. I believe that people generally fall into two cate-
gories: those who are relationship oriented and those who are transaction ori-
ented. Although I have a law practice based on the ability to successfully
complete transactions, I am a relationship-oriented person who generally seeks
out other teammates who are also relationship oriented. I am willing to work
with other teammates who are transaction oriented, but I do so recognizing
that their ability and willingness to step up to solve a problem is limited, espe-
cially after the transaction closes.
Real Estate Attorney
Notice how I wrote real estate attorney, not just attorney. That’s the first tip I
will give you right up front. Real estate transactions are significantly different
from other transactions, so it is critical to hire an attorney who understands
32 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Chuck’s Three Rules of the Game
Rule No. 1: Talent pays for itself. Accept that hiring a capable and talented real estate
team to complete your transaction is in your best interest. Although there will be
costs up front, your investment should more than pay for itself over time.
Rule No. 2: You are hiring folks’ brains; let them use their brains to solve your prob-
lems. Allow teammates to give you their honest and complete assessment of any
transaction given the circumstances presented—you want to know all of the prob-
lems so that you can craft solutions and quantify the costs of obtaining those solu-
tions. Unfortunately, in some instances you will learn that the cost of continuing with
the transaction outweighs the opportunity to be achieved, and you are forced to
stop so as to prevent yourself from throwing good money after bad.
Rule No. 3: It is better to hire someone with outstanding judgment and wisdom
than a person who has merely completed similar types of transactions.
and is experienced in real estate. Contract attorneys without real estate experi-
ence are not good enough.
The reason I am so emphatic here is because a good real estate attorney can
take a lot of the pressure off you by acting as the quarterback and taking re-
sponsibility for coordinating the entire team. A good attorney is strong, experi-
enced, and at the same time self-confident enough to know when he or she
needs your input or help from a third party. There are times when a real estate
transaction will have nuances that your lead real estate attorney—no matter
how experienced—may not have ever encountered before. You don’t want your
attorney learning on your transaction; you want an attorney with a network of
people, inside or outside the firm, that he or she can call on to bridge any gaps.
Often a good real estate attorney can be the master of the due diligence
budget and calendar and keep all the other team members on track and on time
with their deliverables. That means you’ll want your attorney on board early,
right at the very start, to handle the early documents, such as the term sheet or
the letter of intent, to make sure that the allocation and assignment of risks are
thoughtfully documented for closing.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 33
Real Life Story
Every real estate opportunity is different, and it’s the truly unique ones that
sometimes cause your teams to expand beyond your expectations, even into
the realm of the unbelievable.
Too often real estate investors become successful based on their ability to over-
come numerous problems, and they become insensitive to the weight of certain
problems that would otherwise thwart a transaction. I recall one group of clients who
were prolific real estate investors. Although they were astute business people who
accomplished a number of successful transactions in sequence, their history of suc-
cess impeded their ability to walk away from a bad deal, even when they knew that
there would be insufficient equity in a transaction and visible and indivisible deferred
maintenance issues with the heating and cooling system for the apartment complex,
which needed replacement and caused the buildings to settle in the ground by more
than one foot! No matter how successful you have been in the past, you need to
replicate good habits for the diligence and closing with each new transaction.
Most often, however, your team will be highly predictable and consist of several
core members. You will find that the more you work with them, the better you will
all work together, which will increase your efficiency.
A good real estate attorney can be your greatest ally. I frequently find myself
providing ideas and advice that will enhance my clients’ transactions and their
businesses as a whole. At our firm, we approach projects from a business-
owner’s perspective. Business owners want us to tell them the things that are
standing in their way, of course. But they also want us to come up with innova-
tive ways to transcend the problems and get the deal done. If you have an attor-
ney who seems to be pointing out all the problems without posing solutions,
that’s a sign that you may need another attorney. If you have an attorney who
conducts himself or herself in a manner that makes you uncomfortable, e.g.,
rudeness, or overly passive or overly aggressive under the circumstances, then
that’s another sign that you may need another attorney.
Specifically, it’s our job to read and analyze all documentation, including
third-party reports, title and survey, purchase and sale agreements, and loan
documents. Sometimes, we may be requested to draft these documents along
with corporate entity documents when dealing with equity investments and
partnerships.
Hiring a Real Estate Attorney?
What to Look For, and What to Watch Out For
What to Look For
• Portability of past knowledge, wisdom, and judgment
• Availability of time to do the work
• An understanding of professional limitations
• Openness to engaging the assistance of other lawyers or law firms
• A willingness and ability to work as a team player
• Experience in various forms of real estate transactions
• Experience with complex finance structure of real estate transactions
• Demeanor and approach to the practice of law, e. g., that’s part gentleman,
part pit bull
• The support of the law firm—how deep is the bench?
What to Watch Out For
• Any past malpractice claims
• Any past Bar complaints
• Experience with contracts, business, and litigation, but not in relation to real estate
• A personality and/or demeanor incompatible with the client’s personality
and/or demeanor
34 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Your attorney can either bill you hourly for his or her work or provide a soft
estimate for the scope of work. Should the scope of work exceed the estimate,
the additional work is billed at the hourly rate. Another payment method is
hourly against a hard estimate. These agreements generally have a large con-
tingency built in for unforeseen events that is payable at closing. This type of
contract can put the attorney and the client at odds. You want your attorney to
find the unexpected—that can save you in a real estate transaction—but if you
are worried that the work of searching for the unexpected will cost you more
money, you may be thwarting your own success. In the best instances, the fruits
of the deal, or the savings in terms of money and/or risk, a contingent fee that
changes which party is in control will more than pay for any attorney fees.
Many of our clients feel we have more than earned our fees, and that’s ideally
what both sides want.
Over the years I have focused a good portion of my law practice working on
contingent-fee matters related to large revenue bond financings and tax credit
projects. Whenever I have a contingent fee, I want to be the person with the
most control over the ability to advance and close the transaction. However, a
lawyer’s compass needs to be completely aligned with the interest of his client,
regardless of his fee arrangement.
How to Construct an Effective
Engagement Letter
Most members of your team will require an engagement letter before beginning
work. They may provide one, or you can. To protect yourself, make sure the fol-
lowing points are included:
• Spell out scope of work, particularly the roles of each party.
•Specify the nature and timing of payment, including timing of service and
due date.
• Define the particulars of termination for both the contractor and you.
• Be specific on needs (software) and deliverables (eight copies of plans, etc.)
due to cost and which party will bear the cost.
• Disclose conflicting relationships.
• Identify and allocate known risks.
• Dispute resolution.
• Limit liability.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 35
36 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Estate Brokers
Real estate brokers are important team members because they are the genera-
tors of opportunities. They can decide who sees a property that is coming on-
line first and can be the bearer of great opportunities. What it takes is a broker
who understands the importance of relationships and working as part of a team.
On the other hand, many brokers are transactional, living and dying by their
fees, which naturally results in an eat-what-you-kill mentality. They will indis-
criminately pose opportunities that are nothing more than distractions because
they do not fit your business goals. What you really want is a real estate broker
who looks out for your best interest, understands your needs, and seeks out op-
portunities that match them. That adds value.
Beyond this, the true role of a real estate broker is to bring a willing buyer
and willing seller together, not necessarily to ensure his or her client gets the
best deal. But the good ones do both. They work to execute the best possible
transaction for their client from start to finish.
Sometimes a real estate broker will perform what is known as dual repre-
sentation, which means the same broker will represent both the buyer and the
seller. On the surface, this may seem like an opportunity to save some money in
commissions; after all, typical transactions have two brokers who must share
Real Life Story: How to Know Your Real Estate
Broker Is Looking Out for You
The dual brokerage relationship does not trouble me when I see sophisticated
parties on both sides of a transaction. The broker frequently has problems
when there is a mismatch of sophistication among the parties. I have had many
conversations with brokers who had dual agency relationships that they regretted
once problems arose.
I have found that the best real estate brokers have the client’s interests at heart.
The best example I can give relates to my good friend and client, Craig Coppola,
who was acting as my real estate broker in my attempt to buy an office building for
my law firm. Although I had my heart set on buying a particular building, Craig was
a good friend and professional broker who looked me in the eye and told me that it
was not in my best interest to act and that I needed to be patient as the market was
trending downward. Clearly, Craig’s advice was in my best interest and not in his
short-term interest since no commission would be paid.
the commissions. But dual representation can be tricky, and in the very least it
requires full disclosure of all known facts and circumstances to avoid conflicts
of interests.
While most people in business recognize the need to adjust to market
changes, real estate brokers really need to moderate their styles as market con-
ditions fluctuate. During the boom times of the mid 2000s, many real estate
brokers, based on the volume of work, became more transactional as they tried
to close as many deals as they could. But the best ones knew that booms also
create busts, and it’s the real pros who maintain relationships during the booms
that have business during the down times. The best brokers also know that the
height of the market is not the time to buy and provide that level of counsel to
investor clients. They are market advisors as well as salespeople who are in it
for the long term and know that no deal today is worth the loss of many deals
tomorrow. That’s the kind of broker you want.
Accountant
I have found that almost all business is based on some form of mathematics,
and it is important to have accountants who are well versed in the intricacies of
real estate. In fact, much of the advice that I gave you with respect to establish-
ing a relationship with a real estate attorney has equal weight to establishing a
relationship with an accountant.
I have also found that one of the first folks hired internally by real estate in-
vestors is an accountant who will be charged with working cooperatively with
an outside accounting firm. Frequently, the internal accountant is charged with
a substantial amount of responsibility beyond accounting and feels pressure to
limit the involvement of the outside accounting firm. If the internal accountant
is strong enough, then there will not be problems. Unfortunately, problems fre-
quently do arise based on lack of communication and sophistication.
A strong real estate accountant will understand the effect of changes in deal
structure on the various tax attributes such as amortization, depreciation, and
losses (which are inevitable during a construction phase since no money is
being generated during the development and construction of the project). Ad-
ditionally, a real estate accountant will know when it is in your best interest to
obtain a cost segregation study to identify the component parts of the
building(s) so as to allow for an accurate and possibly accelerated application
of amortization and depreciation.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 37
Architect
First of all, special thanks to Greg Zimmerman and Chris Ilg for sharing their
knowledge on this subject. Architects are critical members of any real estate
team because they have the ability like no one else to provide creativity, innova-
tion, and magic that can transform an ordinary property into a showpiece. They
also have the ability to create a lot of expense that sometimes isn’t needed at all.
Good architect partners understand that while they may have the ability to
turn a property into a project that provides accolades and acclaim, the project
objectives may dictate otherwise. The project may require the architect make
minor modifications that deliver big results. They are not exciting modifications,
and they are often not very dramatic. They may not even be all that rewarding
to do, but sometimes that’s the nature of the project, and although the design
work might be mundane, it can deliver a big payoff for the investors. And that
is anything but mundane. While it’s more fun to redesign an apartment building
to create exciting loft living environments, a profitable, cash-flow-positive proj-
ect may require only that the architect figure out how to fit a washer and dryer
in each existing unit. This is actually one of the biggest challenges faced in the
apartment industry. The trend is away from common area laundry rooms, and
architects are challenged to make washers and dryers work in small spaces.
Design professionals are a lot like physicians or attorneys. They specialize.
While there are excellent neurosurgeons out there, you don’t want the neuro-
surgeon performing your heart surgery. And the attorney who makes a living in
divorce court isn’t the one you want handling the financial complexities of a
real estate transaction. Just the same, you don’t want the architect who designs
million-dollar homes designing your mini-storage investment property. You
want the architect who can design those structures in his or her sleep.
But the biggest reason why you want to work with experienced, specialized
architects is because they know the ins and outs. National and local codes
change almost daily. Only architects and their firms can keep up with it all.
Even the slightest revision to any of the several codes could have a serious im-
pact on a design. As an attorney, I have seen too many investors’ projects get
caught up in the complicated codes and laws of building, remodeling, and restor-
ing a property. It wastes a lot of time and can get messy. It’s never easy to fight
city hall, and with the right architect who knows the laws and the regulations,
you should not have to.
Let me elaborate on the word experience. Architecture is a lifelong endeavor,
and it is not unusual for an architect to require years of experience before truly
38 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
gaining the amount of competence required to guide the client through a highly
specialized project. It’s not necessarily just the design aspects that I am talking
about. It’s the peripheral know-how that cannot be learned in school but can
come only from doing things like working through the political process. Work-
ing positively and effectively with federal, state, and city employees is a honed
skill that only comes over time. And let’s not forget the value of a keen sense for
anticipating market trends. After all, the work you are hiring from an architect
may be happening today, but it needs to be valued by customers for years to
come.
Once you interview and select your architectural firm from these perspectives,
you can also look at other important requirements like working relationship and
costs. I won’t elaborate too much on the fact that regardless of how skilled the
architect, if that person can’t work with the team or with you, you need to keep
looking. Relationships are everything, particularly when it comes to the architect.
Too often the design side of the project can put off the trades side of the project
by being overly demanding about aesthetics and not being open to finding rea-
sonable solutions that don’t compromise the look and function of the project.
It’s extremely important to have a strong and collaborative working relationship
between an architect and the general contractor. Forcing the architect or the
general contractor to work with an architect or general contractor that they
don’t work well with leads only to trouble for the property owner.
When it comes to money, be prepared to fully spell out exactly what you are
hoping to achieve—your objectives—and how you would like to achieve them.
Share your budget both for the design aspects of the project and for how much
you plan to put into the building process. You must be concerned at this point
with the architect’s fees, yes, but also the cost to build out the architect’s design.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 39
Experience Is Everything
When you work with an experienced, specialized architect partner, you reap the
advantages:
• Design moves along quicker.
• There is not a steep learning curve.
• You get a completed design that works with fewer surprises.
• Plans, although custom, are somewhat field-tested.
• Building is smoother because the plans have commonalities with past projects.
• He knows the ins and outs of building codes.
Again, having been involved in many real estate projects, I have seen architects
create designs that are simply too costly to build under the predefined budget
and profitability constraints. Those are severe mistakes that can cost time and
money. Architects and contractors must communicate to avoid these kinds of
problems.
The better the information that you give the architect up front, the more ac-
curate his fee proposal should be. Understandably, it is difficult to have a handle
on every issue surrounding a project; things do come up that are unexpected.
But there are ways to protect yourself a bit from costs getting out of control.
First of all, you may want to begin your working relationship with an architect
by putting together an agreement for the due diligence and preliminary
design/consulting work. There is nothing wrong with doing this, and as long as
both you and the architect understand that further work is contingent on the
success and outcomes of the preliminary work, you may find this is the best
arrangement.
You can implement this kind of arrangement with either a phased contract
or better yet, a time and materials contract with provisions for a subsequent
contract using the American Institute of Architects (AIA) form B181, which is a
standard agreement between an owner and an architect. You can find this form
on the Internet when you search AIA B181. It may serve as a good reference for
you.
The benefit of this arrangement is that you can move forward without a huge
commitment and no real idea of what can be done. That’s handy because most
likely at this point, you won’t have much idea of what can be done. That’s why
you need the architect. The benefit to the architect is job security. It’s nice to
know that if the due diligence is favorable, all further work, including time, de-
signs, and working drawings will be developed in his or her office. That also is
excellent incentive for the architect to work harder to find feasible design solu-
tions that fit into the budget for the project. If he or she wants more work, then
make the project work.
I’ve seen this approach work well quite often. One minor, but important,
point is that the services you contract with the architect may require the services
of other consultants. I recommend contracting with them directly to maintain
knowledge and control over the outside service provider’s work and progress.
Assuming the project moves forward, and you and the architect have exe-
cuted the contracts, the next phase is all about communication. The best, most
efficient projects I’ve been associated with have been ones where the design
team holds weekly meetings and provides progress plans and updates for re-
view. With so many moving parts to any design project, keeping everyone in-
40 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
formed is always a top priority. When well executed, it speeds up the process
and delivers far better outcomes.
Once the design and development phase is complete, the construction docu-
ments get under way. At this point, it is the architect who should control the
consultants and keep the attorneys and lender informed of all progress. As a
ring leader for the design and construction side of the project, all information
needs to funnel through the architect to maintain control and ensure that no
deviation to the schedule, scope, and of course, fees are made without his or
her knowledge.
Civil Engineer
Civil engineers are frequently hired by your architect. They are responsible for
locating existing utilities and developing the plans to connect to them or deter-
mine if and how to upsize the capacity. ALTA surveys are part of this process, as
is obtaining a “will serve” letter from the utility provider, which legally obliges
it to serve the particular project with utility service.
Civil engineers are also responsible for such things as drainage, grading re-
quirements, and in cases where canal irrigation is involved, that too. Your ar-
chitect will inform you when and why a civil engineer is needed for a project.
Your architect will review all contracts for service from not only civil engi-
neers but all related design consultants. And I recommend you allow your real
estate attorney to review these documents as well, solely from a legal perspec-
tive. By contrast, the architect will review them to make sure the intent of the
design is being met and to look for gaps and overlaps with the goal of a seamless
scope of service.
You will want to execute the contracts once your real estate attorney and ar-
chitect have reviewed them and given them the go ahead. Often these contracts
contain contingencies or line items in them that are part of the contract, but
which could be separately executed or deleted as needed. Your attorney and
architect can point these out, but be aware that if these contingencies are exe-
cuted in the course of work because of requirements in the field, they can and
often will cost you more money.
In my experience, civil engineers are not known for adding on unneeded
services, but rather omitting services. And it is very difficult as a property owner,
particularly if you have not been doing this work for twenty years, to know what
the civil engineer should have done until there’s a torrential rain and you find
half your parking lot is submerged in a murky brown puddle. Then you know
more work should have been done regarding drainage. These things happen.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 41
42 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
The challenges a civil engineer can solve go beyond the concrete world of
grading, utilities, and drainage. I always recommend to my clients that they
find civil engineering firms with a lead engineer or representative who is not
only knowledgeable of civil engineering but knows how to walk the corridors
of city hall. Political savvy is a huge value-added advantage. Knowing the people
who matter and then presenting your case before city officials and a crowd of
interested citizens without acting and sounding like a civil engineer is a real
ace card to hold.
Three Most Common Pitfalls with Civil Engineers
1. Delivering in a timely manner.
2. Plans that do not have sufficient detail to match the existing utilities.
3. Plans that fail to adequately take into consideration the property’s topography
as it relates to water retention and drainage.
Overcome these problems by holding your civil engineers to incentivized timeta-
bles and have your engineer, architect, and your contractor review the drawings
with all those involved in advance.
Professional Surveyor
We’ve all seen surveyors standing in the middle of the street, gazing through
their transits and taking measurements of the ground. This information is pre-
cisely what makes property owners and lenders sleep well at night, knowing
that the properties they are considering during the due diligence phase are all
that they have been stated to be. And best of all, they report this information
with a very official document that bears all the appropriate seals and certifica-
tions. It’s the real deal, and it becomes a matter of public record.
So what exactly are surveyors looking for, and looking at, through those tiny
site scopes? When it comes to most projects, they are confirming or establishing
the following:
• Easements. The surveyor is designating or verifying the access into and out
of the property.
• Dimension and Location of Property. The surveyor is looking at and marking
the property lines to determine the property’s exact size and location in re-
spect to other properties.
• Encroachments. The surveyor is looking at the property lines and determin-
ing if any structures belonging to another party are within your property
line . . . or yours within theirs. This can affect the appraised value of a prop-
erty and cost money to remediate.
• Location of All Buildings and Improvements. The surveyor is determining
the exact placement of all buildings and improvements within the land parcel
to assert that they are placed as specified and that they are within the con-
straints of local building codes.
• Nonvehicular Access. The surveyor is determining the exact placement of
any nonvehicular access easements like pedestrian walkways that may exist
on the property. These can impact building improvement and building place-
ment plans.
• Traffic Calming Measures. The surveyor is looking at and indicating or plan-
ning the location of traffic-calming improvements such as speed humps, me-
dian plantings, etc., that slow traffic and improve the environment for
residents, pedestrians, and bicyclists.
Of course, every project dictates what your surveyor will need to do, and ev-
ery piece of land brings its own unique needs, too. In the mountainous, boulder-
ridden terrain of Arizona—a state with strict laws related to indigenous plants
and natural formations—surveyors indicate the location of every giant saguaro
cactus, every palo verde tree, and any rock outcroppings that are to be preserved
as natural space.
Ultimately, your title company and the surveyors themselves do not want
there to be any gaps between adjacent properties. There are a lot of reasons for
this when you think about it. One is ownership. Who is responsible to care and
maintain the gap area? A second is liability. Are both owners, one or neither, re-
sponsible for a mishap that may take place in between property lines?
Another is property value. It can be really expensive to buy a small piece of
land that your project may need in order to be compliant with development re-
quirements related to setbacks, ingress, and egress, etc. Remember, just because
you may need additional land to complete your project does not mean that your
neighbor has to sell it to you.
Hazardous Substance Site Assessment Engineer
This is a professional you want to bring on very early in the due diligence process
because if he or she finds there are hazardous substances on the property, you
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 43
may want to rethink everything. Your lenders will strongly advise and may even
insist upon it. You simply must know the status of the property in terms of haz-
ardous substances. There have been too many cases where—and these are the
worst kind—entire housing developments have been built in areas that were
later found to be toxic. Love Canal in New York is one of them. Cases that are far
less dramatic, but still incredibly expensive, are those where a hazard exists but
can be remediated. You never want to find yourself responsible for the first sce-
nario; it is actually quite difficult, given the law and requirements for develop-
ment and redevelopment today. But in the event of the second case, which is
more likely to occur, at least know what kind of remediation costs you are in for.
When selecting an environmental engineer, begin by finding one who is fully
accredited in the field. Having a trustworthy relationship with your mortgage
banking professional is also key. The mortgage banker will know which envi-
ronmental engineers are responsive and familiar with the reporting require-
ments of a broad spectrum of lenders. The lender may have a list of preferred
providers that may at times take selection out of the borrower’s hands. It is also
important that while your environmental engineer is thorough so as to identify
actual existing recognized environmental conditions, he does not create un-
necessary work by requiring more expensive Phase II reports.
During due diligence, you must contract what is called a Phase I hazardous
substance site contamination study. Among the many things the inspector looks
at, he or she will perform a visual assessment of the site and surrounding prop-
erties; interview the owner, neighbors, occupants; and take a look at the site’s
history. The goal is to determine if any hazardous materials were ever manu-
factured, stored, or dumped there. At this stage the inspector doesn’t take any
samples.
Ideally, you will receive a clean Phase I report and not need any additional
testing or a Phase II study in which the inspector takes samples of the discov-
ered hazardous materials. This process can be costly and time-consuming be-
cause sometimes just getting the “samples” requires excavation and core
drillings.
Interestingly, certain entities in the chain of title may have remediation re-
sponsibility should hazardous materials be found. In addition, they have a dis-
closure responsibility should they know of these hazards during the due
diligence period. Lenders obviously are looking for a clean Phase I report so
that there is no drag on their ability to seize collateral and liquidate, should the
need arise. This action usually requires stepping into the chain of title, and it’s
best if there are no obstacles due to a history of hazardous materials liability.
44 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Recently, engineers to prepare Phase I and II reports have sought to limit
the amount of their liability to property owners by having their engagement
letter or contract specify that damages are limited to the amount of fees paid to
the engineer. Obviously, limitations of this nature do not afford the property
owner the benefit intended when a professional engineer was hired to conduct
the Phase I or II investigation and report.
Escrow Officer/Title Agent
The more real estate deals you do, the more you will get to know your escrow
officer/title agent. This person acts as a neutral party who is attempting to carry
out the express written instructions of the buyer, the seller, the lender(s), and
in some cases the real estate brokers. They review and verify all documents
and pass the documents along with the funds between the appropriate parties
in the transaction. They are there at closing.
Again, my approach to this chapter is from a legal perspective. Where I have
seen issues relating to this area is in title insurance. It is the title agent who is-
sues the title insurance policy. Title insurance is insurance covering the past
because it protects only against losses arising from events that occurred prior
to the date of the policy. Coverage ends on the day the policy is issued and ex-
tends backward in time for an indefinite period. This is in marked contrast to
property or life insurance, which protect against losses resulting from events
that occur after the policy is issued, for a specified period into the future. A
Title policy protects property owners and lenders from monetary losses that
could result from ownership of a property’s title, which may include fraud, liens
against the property, or errors missed during the title search. Title insurance
does not prevent loss of marketability due to a title claim, and that is important
to know if you are going to assume ownership of a property.
In other words, a title insurance policy does not obligate the title insurance
company to make corrections to your property’s title if a problem is discovered;
rather it simply provides a basis to receive monetary compensation for your
loss at a maximum level specified by the title policy limits.
I am frequently surprised by a real estate investor’s willingness to accept a
title company’s offer to “insure over” a known risk because the title insurance
does not cure the apparent defect in the title; which may come back to haunt
the property owner in the future.
The policy covers only the amount of the loan, so the policy’s cost is based on
this amount. It is best to obtain both a lender and owner’s policy. The coverage
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 45
extended to the owner is usually referred to as the ALTA policy, which must be
based in part on a survey.
The talent associated with escrow and title officers varies widely. For that
reason it is important to know who we are dealing with and their approach to
solving problems. An effective escrow agent anticipates the demand of the
transaction for all parties and is proactive. I am very loyal to escrow and title
officers who I know have the capacity to close complex transactions in a timely
manner. Unfortunately, I had to kiss a few toads in order to find folks who are
keepers!
Mortgage Broker
Selecting your mortgage broker is one of the most important decisions you will
make. You want to find a mortgage broker, who like the architect you choose,
specializes in your area of investment. You may not know this, but the brokerage
industry is a specialty business, and few brokers possess the expertise needed
to service all areas of the lending arena. I want a broker who is well versed in
not only the execution of the loan but also very in touch with the local trends.
If your proposed project is not well suited to the market, your mortgage broker
should tell you outright or will facilitate the market telling you. Either way,
you’ll know because the process will be arduous and most likely not well re-
ceived by lenders.
Almost anything can trigger lending difficulties. Perhaps the proposed proj-
ect isn’t right for the location. Or maybe the location is right, but the timing
isn’t right for the project. Sometimes the lender will raise flags because the
plan and proposed product didn’t go through enough feasibility studies or a
satisfactory amount of market research to ensure the project is on target. Any
investor who comes to a mortgage broker without having done his or her home-
work and as a result made the proper adjustments to the plan and design will
find the underwriting will stall, and a loan will be next to impossible to attain.
That’s a failure by the investor.
A failure on the mortgage broker’s side can happen, too. A good mortgage
broker should guide you to the most appropriate lending vehicle and steer you
clear of the ones that are not in your best interest. Too often I have seen or
heard of mismatches between a product and the type of loan terms, even when
the product has qualified for that kind of loan. A mismatch can impact a lot of
things, not the least of which is the pro forma of the property. It can also con-
tribute to reduced profitability. And loan vehicles such as city, local, and federal
46 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
funding have stringent requirements so their cost-benefit is questionable, unless
the fit is just right. Your mortgage broker should be very clear about every loan
term so you can take full advantage of them and avoid the pitfalls. If there is
something you don’t understand, do whatever it takes to clarify it.
You also should ask your mortgage broker what they know about tax credit,
HUD financing, and related agencies, and ask them to relate to you the advan-
tages and disadvantages of these financing vehicles. Experience with them in
addition to knowledge about them is a real advantage. The last thing you want
is a mortgage broker who is learning on the job with your project. Look for a
seasoned veteran.
In the absence of a good mortgage broker partner, some real estate attorneys—
I am one of them—also specialize in obtaining the most favorable financing ve-
hicles available. It is a service we provide, and I am sure we are not alone. Given
that your attorney is looking out for your best interest, he or she will analyze the
loan for more than just interest rates and amortization schedules. He or she will
read the fine print and the finer points to discover any possible ways a loan, be-
cause of its terms, could come back to bite you years later.
Insurance Agent
I won’t go into big detail on this one except to make a few points. Have an in-
surance agent who specializes in real estate and development early on in the
process to avoid easily avoidable pitfalls. The lender generally has the specific
coverage required for your transaction. You should be able to rely on your in-
surance broker to easily interpret the requirements and deliver an insurance
certificate covering the same within twenty-four hours.
Over the years, as lending has become more oriented to packaging loans for
sale in the secondary market, lenders have dictated the types of insurance that
must be obtained, as well as the limits that they believe to be appropriate. Your
insurance agent should be able to provide you additional insight with respect
to the suitability of the proposed forms of coverage applicability of the proposed
limits.
There are probably entire agencies in your city or town that offer mostly real
estate, construction, and development insurance. There are a number of things,
based on your project, that will require insurance of one sort or another. Insur-
ance is all about risk management and the question becomes how much risk
you want to assume versus if you should pay a premium to have someone else
assume it. If you know in advance the type of insurance you will need, you can
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 47
factor it into your project budget and determine if the project is feasible and
will deliver a solid return with these added costs. If it won’t, then you may want
to reconsider the project entirely.
1031 Exchange Intermediary
Every time a client presents me with an opportunity to participate in an IRC
Section 1031 transaction, I insist that he or she had his or her accountants run
the numbers to determine the effect of paying the taxes versus deferring the
tax with an exchange. From my vantage point, the tax savings do not replace
the need for a strong real estate transaction for the replacement property. I be-
lieve you make money buying real estate; which is best demonstrated when you
sell real estate.
Many times, investors are working on a project that will be part of a 1031 Ex-
change. There’s an entire chapter in this book about exchanges, but in a nutshell,
a 1031 Exchange occurs when you sell one property and purchase another prop-
erty under the tax code 1031 and minimize or avoid paying taxes on the gain.
Anytime a 1031 Exchange is involved, you should have a qualified intermediary
execute it. The reason is simple. If there is any misstep with the procedures of
the exchange, you will not qualify and you will end up paying the taxes you
were trying to avoid.
You want to know exactly how much the tax is and weigh the pros and cons
of the exchange. A good test in my opinion, is asking yourself whether or not
you would go forward with the transaction if an exchange was not involved. In
other words, would you still consider this opportunity a good investment? Even
if you answer yes to this question, I always make sure my client has discussed
the exchange with me and his or her tax advisor so the entire plan can be viewed
in light of the investor’s bigger financial picture.
There are also nontax reasons for exchanges. Here are a few that you may
not have considered:
• Exchange from fully depreciated property to a higher value property that
can be depreciated.
• Exchange from non-income-producing raw land to improved property to
create cash flow.
• Exchange to meet location requirements.
• Exchange from a larger property to several smaller properties, used to divide
an estate among several heirs or for retirement reasons.
48 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
• Exchange from a tenants-in-common interest in one property to a fee interest
in another property.
So what do you look for in a qualified intermediary? Exchangors must feel
confident that exchange funds will be safe and available for the successful con-
clusion of their exchange. It is best to hire a qualified intermediary that, first,
comes highly recommended by other real estate investors. You should also do
your own due diligence to determine how the intermediary is investing funds
it has on hand. Recently, a large intermediary was unable to fulfill its funding
obligations because it had invested the bulk of its funds in auction rate securi-
ties, which became illiquid overnight! If you cannot understand the nature of
the intermediary’s underlying investments, then you should not let the inter-
mediary hold your money!
Second, be sure to obtain a written guarantee for the exchange of funds. And,
finally, verify that the qualified intermediary has fidelity bond coverage, prefer-
ably in the amount of $100 million professional liability insurance and employee
theft and dishonesty coverage.
General Contractors
Nearly all real estate projects involve some construction or renovation. And for
that reason, having a general contractor run the show is a good idea. Unless
you are a general contractor yourself, you should never attempt to manage your
own construction, no matter how well you think you can do it. If you are an in-
vestor, remain an investor.
It should almost go without saying that you want to be very careful which
contractor you choose. Your decision will greatly impact the quality of your
project. You can get excellent referrals from your architect who may even rec-
ommend one particular contractor. And if you have selected the right insurance
agency in your city or town, the one that specializes in construction and does
the bond work for all the contractors in town, you will be able to get some solid
referrals from them as well. Other than that, you can ask your attorney, mortgage
brokers, lender, and look around town at the projects that are currently under-
way. That will give you a good idea of which companies are the most reputable.
No matter how tempting it is to go cheap and hire a small-time player for
your “small job,” it is never a good idea to hire any contractor who isn’t licensed
and insured. As an attorney, I will never allow my clients to assume the astro-
nomical risks that they are assuming when working with a contractor or any
trades person who is not licensed and insured.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 49
I think it is always a good idea to determine whether or not the general con-
tractor can obtain a performance and payment bond. If you learn that the gen-
eral contractor is unable to obtain a performance and payment bond, you should
find out exactly why that is the case. If the general contractor is involved in its
own development activities, bonding companies will frequently shy away from
the risk. However, if the general contractor is not involved in development,
then bonding companies should be more inclined to underwrite the risk asso-
ciated with the general contractor’s affairs. If a performance and payment bond
is obtained, the general contractor will pass the cost on to the developer, which
may be significant.
Your general contractor is responsible for carrying out the design plans to
the letter, and for managing the trade contractors (subcontractors) who will
actually do the work. General contractors seldom actually perform any of the
trades themselves; they are simply very experienced project managers who
know the process of construction and know the people and the companies that
will get the work done. Pick a good contractor and you elevate your chances of
having good trades people working on your project. You should look for general
contractors who pay their subcontractors and material men in a timely manner
and have a systematized manner of obtaining all of the required lien releases.
Too often, general contractors who are struggling look to use subcontractors
and material men as a form of working capital financing, as a result of the gen-
eral contractor’s failure to pay them in a timely manner. Ask for a list of refer-
ences who are subcontractors from various trades and material men from
various product lines.
How do you know you have a good contractor? First of all, look at their pre-
vious projects. Walk through them. Is the quality up to your standards of excel-
lence? You can tell by looking at finishes and details. If the details are shoddy,
one can only assume what lies behind the walls hidden from view isn’t much
better. Second, and perhaps even more important, is ask the tradespeople. Does
the contractor pay them on time, or is the company always running way behind
on payment? This could be a sign of cash flow problems. Stay as far clear of that
as you can. What you don’t want is to have construction loan draws that are
meant to be buying your building materials going to pay off an old debt on an-
other project.
And speaking of money, building costs—like anything else—can start out in
one solar system and end up in a completely differently galaxy if not closely
managed right from the time of the initial estimate. To set a price, you’ll need a
50 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
clearly defined budget, a clearly defined scope of work, and a clearly defined
schedule.
From my vantage point, I believe that folks starting out in development
should look to work with established general contractors who have obtained a
performance or payment bond for the project. The additional costs associated
with the performance and payment bond are substantially less than the poten-
tial downside.
Construction Risks That Can
Cost You Money
As an attorney, I’m always concerned about risks, so here are a few that I have
encountered, which you’ll want to keep within your field of view. It will save you
money.
• Poorly defined separation of functions between architect, engineer, and contractor.
• Scope creep that causes a small project to become a big one based on change
orders.
• Project acceleration. This may be done as a way to provide an incentive for your
contractor to complete your project prior to the original date for purposes of in-
terest savings, favorable material pricing, or changes and deadlines for laws or
regulations.
• Poor working relationships between parties that cause a lack of collaboration and
inefficiencies.
Keeping your contractors happy is pretty easy. Mostly what they want is to
be paid on time. They, in turn, have subcontractors to pay and paying them on
time keeps their tradespeople happy. Pay on time and you have a happy worksite.
Contractors also tend to take great pride in the work that they do and feel a
great sense of accomplishment bringing a building out of the ground. And, fi-
nally, they value their relationships with owners, designers, and subcontractors.
Work as a team, keeping all these things in good standing, and you’ll have a
general contractor who will become a valued asset to your real estate investment
business.
You can learn more about contractors in Chapter 4, in which Ross McCallis-
ter talks about profits from the ground up.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 51
52 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
A Few Final Words
Any real estate project is all about minimizing financial risk, time risk, design
risk, and quality risk. It’s about choosing the right people to help you achieve
this and working collaboratively all along the way. If you are the type of person
who seems to foster adversarial relationships, this will be difficult. That’s not
to say that there won’t be times when being tough will be required. There most
definitely will be.
You’ll find as you go from simple projects to the more complex that your team
will have to function at a higher level with greater cooperation and problem-
solving abilities. In all instances, and with every project—big or small—that you
do, have a good attorney looking out for your interests. Find the best one you
can, and let him or her do the job you deserve.
Charles W. Lotzar is founder of the Lotzar Law Firm, P.C., a diversified
practice with representation of clients in commercial and real estate
transactions, low-income housing, tax credit financings, administrative
proceedings, and various forms of tax-exempt and taxable bond financ-
ings. A former senior partner in the national law firm, Kutak Rock LLP,
Lotzar is involved in all phases of real estate development, including debt
and equity financing. He has extensive experience in dealing with public contracts and issues
related to public officials, and he has been involved in bond financings that have an aggregate
value in excess of $5 billion.
Wayne Palmer is an artist and a creative genius. However, his creativity is
not seen in a painting or heard in the harmony of a song. Wayne’s creative
genius comes from seeing what cannot be seen: putting a deal together out of the
invisible and creating a financial masterpiece.
Wayne is really an alchemist, taking different disciplines such law, taxes, mar-
keting, and design and transforming them into exceptional real estate investments.
In other words, it is not the building or the raw land that is the investment. It is
the ability to create value out of the elements and forces that surround real estate
that gives Wayne his advantage.
Wayne’s mastery of creative financing can’t be fully described; it must be expe-
rienced. As you study Wayne’s three chapters in this book, you’ll begin to see what
I mean by that. You’ll begin to understand the difference between Wayne and the
rest of the world. Wayne can see a way to make a deal work in less time than it
takes most people to pick up a pen and sign their name. And his often simple solu-
tions to financing problems will leave you asking, “Why didn’t I think of that?” He
has a rare gift that maybe he was born with, and that his lifetime of experience as
a real estate developer, certified real estate note appraiser, certified cash flow mas-
ter broker, and licensed continuing education provider has certainly honed. Wayne
is one of kind, and he presents to anyone reading this book an opportunity to see
the world of finance in a way that you’ve never seen it before.
3Wayne PALMER
The Way to Exotic Wealth
53
54 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Wayne is a man I trust. If a person is going to be creative, it is imperative that
he or she holds him or herself to the highest of legal, ethical, and moral standards,
which is Wayne’s true strong suit. While he is always pleasant, enthusiastic, and
speaks with a smile, his graciousness does not interfere with his straightforward
candor. He will tell you what he thinks, even if it means saying that he thinks the
deal stinks or that the person representing it is either incompetent or of shady
character.
The beauty and power of real estate investing is found in the scope of creativity
each property affords the investor. Whenever I am at a dead end, brain dead, and
in need of a shot of creativity, Wayne is the person I call.
—Robert Kiyosaki
I sat staring at the envelope with the anticipation of a youngster on Christmas
morning. Seeing the title company logo, I had a pretty good idea of what
was inside. After months of patient teamwork, the escrow had finally closed. It
had required our best collective skills to complete the transaction. I felt a vi-
bration that I knew was part steel on paper and part the tingle of adrenaline as
the letter opener glided through the cotton bond. I carefully reached in and re-
moved a single document and unfolded it. It was a proceeds check made payable
to my company for $1,175,206.16.
As I paused to savor the victory, my mind wandered back over my thirty
years in real estate. How had we come so far? I remembered days in the distant
past when lunch money was hard to come by. What was so different about then
compared to now? Why was it so relatively easy today to make a million dollars
on a single transaction while it had sometimes seemed so difficult to make a
living years ago? As I breathed in the magnitude of the moment, one word came
to mind, and it wasn’t the economy or boom times or anything about having
more money. It was simple: formulas.
The word “formula” is rarely used in the real estate industry. We hear about
formulas in math and chemistry, but not in real estate. What could a cluster of
numerals and digits, strung together with mathematical operatives, possibly
have to do with making money? I smiled at the thought, realizing how few peo-
ple in real estate understand the power of one good formula. I noticed a wave
of gratitude flood over me. I felt so lucky to know the formula that had proven
to be worth a million dollars.
What could a cluster of numerals and digits, strung together with math-
ematical operatives, possibly have to do with making money?
A Harvard friend once explained to me that certain truths are too big and
too powerful to express, except in the language of mathematics. Even Einstein
and his fellow physicist couldn’t explain the nature of our universe with mere
words, only with equations. Formulas allow us to identify, condense, and use
chunks of information that would otherwise be too big to manage.
As I held a $1 million check in my hand, I thought about all that had led up
to receiving it. If I were to write a formula to express how that had happened,
what would it be? I put the check down on my desk where I could glance at it,
and just for fun, I picked up a pad and pen to see if I could create a formula that
captured the key elements. Since I didn’t major in math, I didn’t intend to come
up with anything of cosmic significance. I just wanted to know if there was a
way to boil it down to one simple and concise expression. After a few failed at-
tempts, scratch-outs, and rearrangements, I looked at what I had scrawled on
the paper with a strange sense of satisfaction.
W = ( XO (T+E) ) / K
Yes! That was it! My entire career summarized in one inch or less. All of the
study, all of the acquired skills, all of the systems I had learned to operate within
the “big system” we call real estate were included. I knew I was on to something.
I could see that if I could put the essence of my formula in writing, others could
save years of struggle by applying the same principles to build their own wealth.
That is what I set out to do!
So what exactly does the formula mean?
[W] WEALTH equals [X] EXCHANGE multiplied by [O] OPPORTUNITY
multiplied by the sum of [T] TALENT plus [E] EQUITY divided by [K]
SPEED/TIME.
Let’s look at what each of these variables mean.
W “Wealth”
What is it? The word clearly has different meanings for different people.
Tabloids provide ample examples of the fabulously rich and famous who often
appear to live miserable lives in spite of their money. On the other end of the
TIP
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 55
spectrum, I have seen those who barely survive economically but who seem
blissfully happy. True wealth, it would seem, is not only about cash in the bank,
although most definitions of wealth do include a certain amount of money. I
know my own definition of wealth has evolved over time to include freedom,
good health, peace of mind, happy relationships, education, recreation, and the
ability to serve others. However, for purposes of this chapter and this book, my
formula—W = (XO (T+E)) / K—focuses primarily on monetary wealth.
I define monetary wealth as assets that generate enough cash flow to sustain
my chosen lifestyle indefinitely, with minimal time and effort required on my part
to manage them. In Rich Dad terms, it is getting out of the rat race. Wealth is an
end result, just like the million-dollar check was the end result of one transac-
tion. Becoming wealthy is an overarching goal of the game of business.
I have concluded that one of the great gifts of living in a free society is that
everyone has the right to choose what works best for them and how much
wealth is enough.
X “EXchange”
Whenever an economic transaction occurs, there is an eXchange of value that
takes place. In ancient barter- or commodity-based economies, a cow may have
been traded for several bushels of wheat. Milk was traded for eggs. Chickens
were traded for hogs, etc. In each of these transactions, it is easy to see the sym-
metry of the exchange. In currency-based economies, we trade money for goods
and services. Regardless, if we look past the symbols of value, such as the ani-
mals or the coins, we can see that something else is actually being exchanged.
What is the “something else”?
It has been said that energy is everything and everything is energy. With
modern scientific tools, such as electron microscopes, we have learned that
things are not what they appear to be. What appears to be solid is actually a
mass of atoms that each has electrons swirling around the nucleus at astonishing
speeds. Each atom that makes up any substance on earth is pure energy. There
is relatively as much space between the nucleus and the electrons of the average
atom as there is between the earth and the sun. What we see as solid isn’t solid
at all. We only perceive it as such.
Our perceptions about money are much the same. We have come to think of
it as real wealth, but is it real, or is it only the symbol of the energy that consti-
tutes real wealth? I would suggest that the real wealth, or value, that is ex-
changed in any economic transaction—the “something else”—is not the money
56 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
but the energy that the exchange of the money causes to move from one place
to another. If I use my money to buy oil, it is not the oil that I want but the
energy contained in the oil that has value to me. If I exchange my money for
food, the value isn’t in the food itself but in its ability to provide me with physical
energy and perhaps some pleasure in the eating.
The X in our formula represents the eXchange of energy that takes place in
a transaction. There are elements of both quantity and quality to each of these
exchanges. The element of quantity is easy to see. I pay $2 for a loaf of bread,
$3 for a gallon of milk, $4 for a gallon of gas, or $6 for a pound of fish. The
aspect of quality is a bit trickier.
Left to its own devices, nature always returns to balance. In the deserts of
the Western United States, we have lots of rabbits. From time to time, the pop-
ulation of rabbits may increase to the point that they overrun their habitat. In
response, nature produces only enough food in the habitat for so many rabbits,
and so the weakest starve and die. Or, the coyotes in surrounding areas discover
that rabbits are plentiful and come to dine on the bounteous bunnies. As human
beings, we have the opportunity to rise above the random and seemingly violent
balancing that’s found in nature, by committing ourselves to balancing the en-
ergy of our transactions right up front. This is where the quality of the exchange
comes into play. If I make sure that I give full value, or in other words, a full
measure of energy, in each transaction to which I am a party, I harness the
power of nature in providing perpetual abundance. Nature is inherently abun-
dant when balance is maintained.
So, for purposes of our formula, a fair exchange of energy is simply to con-
sciously give something equal to or greater in value than what one receives. It
is a living commitment to the principle of win/win. It is taking pride in the
quality of one’s contribution. If I give at least as much as I want to receive, na-
ture will balance the scales by seeing that I get full measure in return. If I give
extra, I create a vacuum and nature rushes to fill a vacuum, so I set myself up to
receive a greater portion. Once this principle of energy eXhange is understood
and followed, there can no longer be any lack of any kind. Natural law will see
to that.
O “Opportunity”
Oh, say, can you see? “America is [still] the land of opportunity.” In my opinion,
this statement is actually truer today than it has ever been. If anyone doubts its
validity, I invite them to observe the accomplishments of people immigrating
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 57
to the United States. They typically come to America with little money, lacking
in language skills, and having no background about how Americans do things.
Yet, many immigrants build successful businesses, buy nice homes, and end up
sending their children to the best schools available, all within a fifteen-to
twenty-year period. They seize opportunities and acquire wealth that forever
changes their economic standing.
“America is [still] the land of opportunity.” In my opinion, this
statement is actually truer today than it has ever been. . . . However,
I don’t believe America is the only land of opportunity.
However, I don’t believe America is the only land of opportunity. Through
my travels, studies, and friends, I see tremendous entrepreneurial possibilities
in every capitalist country in the world. It is a matter of clear vision and of train-
ing ourselves to see things as they are, not as they once were, or as we hope they
might be.
I would ask this of anyone doubting the quality of today’s opportunities: Are
you willing to work as hard, study as long, and sacrifice as much as the immi-
grants that come to this country do? I think it is an important question because
those newcomers are today’s competitors, just as the ancestors of most Ameri-
cans were the newcomers competing for opportunities when they passed
through Boston Harbor or Ellis Island. I have no patience for those who stand
around whining about things, instead of harvesting the opportunities that are
everywhere to be found. Some may cite economic downturns as evidence that
the good days are gone. To the contrary, times of economic turbulence may ar-
guably provide greater opportunities to build wealth even faster.
I trust in Buckminster Fuller’s concept of “ephemeralization,” which para-
phrased is to progressively do more with less, faster. The technological revolu-
tion we are part of gives us incredible competitive capability and leaves us
without excuse. Yes, many things are different now than they were generations
ago and may be even more difficult in some ways. However, given all of the ad-
vantages we have that our ancestors lacked, I believe we still have the edge. I
know I wouldn’t want to trade places with them.
Think about the leverage inherent in just a few of our modern conveniences:
Air travel. More than once, I have left Europe in the morning and arrived home
in the Rocky Mountains by nightfall, traveling in the comfort of kings. It took my
ancestors months of sacrifice and peril to make the same journey by ship.
TIP
58 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Cell phones. I am able to talk to anyone from almost anywhere, at minimal ex-
pense. I remember the days when I had to get back to my office before I could re-
turn calls, act on a thought, or solve a critical problem. Now I can make use of
drive time, down time, and spare time as it occurs, with the greatest convenience.
Word-processing software. Decades ago, what constituted a workforce of
several secretaries in an office of several hundred square feet is now the size of
a book and sits comfortably on my lap. My PC gives me word processing ca-
pacity with instant correction, printing, graphics, and even video and sound, if
desired. It even surpasses the capacity of entire publishing companies of an-
other era.
Electronic document transfer. When I first started in real estate (1976) there
were no fax machines. I put fifty thousand miles a year on my car, just chasing
down signatures on documents and delivering them to mortgage companies,
title companies, clients, etc. Now I can send a fully executed copy to everyone
simultaneously, without ever leaving my desk and without using a single sheet
of paper or a thimbleful of gasoline.
The Internet. It is difficult to begin to estimate the value of so much infor-
mation at one’s fingertips. The physical equivalent of the electronic information
available on the Internet today would obviously fill the world’s libraries and
require a staff of several thousand to retrieve when needed. Even then, it would
be impossible to match the speeds at which such information is delivered to
my computer screen. It is as though all of the knowledge in the world is just a
click away. How could our forbearers compete with that?
Consider how only these few tools multiply a person’s time, especially when
you consider the time, effort, and knowledge it would take to physically repro-
duce the results one can achieve by using these spectacular tools. We truly live
in a time of marvelous opportunities.
As I see it, the biggest challenge in real estate today is to sort through the
hundreds of opportunities that are constantly available to determine which
ones are the best and which ones truly warrant the allocation of precious time,
talent, and capital. My only frustration with “opportunity” is that I cannot pos-
sibly invest in all of the good deals I see.
Since opportunity is all around us and the challenge is to sort through the
many to find the fabulous few, I believe the most important aspect of the “O” is
to become skilled at analyzing opportunity. While this book is full of powerful
ideas on how to do just that, here are my basic guidelines in the form of ten ques-
tions. (Yes, we literally put every deal through the “Ten Questions” routine!)
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 59
60 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Wayne’s Opportunity Filter—Ten Questions
1. Is the project in harmony with our major goals and purposes?
2. Are the people involved of good character, and will we likely enjoy working with
them?
3. Does the project make sense as explained?
4. Does it promise returns equal to, or better than, our target rates?
5. Do we have, or can we hire, the skill required to successfully complete the project?
6. Do we have, or can we get, the capital needed?
7. Do we have the time to successfully oversee the project?
8. Does it provide at least three acceptable exit strategies?
9. Can we live with the worst case scenario, and is it within our risk profile?
10. Is it a win/win for everyone concerned?
We call this our Opportunity Filter. If we are satisfied with the answers to
these ten questions, we will go to the next step and do in-depth underwriting,
or “due diligence,” as it is called in our industry.
Let’s go back to the million-dollar check mentioned at the beginning of this
chapter and walk through the project that generated it. As background, the
project was a sixty-acre residential development that was only partway through
the entitlement process and was in foreclosure. The owners had twenty-four
hours to cure the default or they would lose the property, their down payment
of nearly $200,000 cash, and more than $3 million in equity.
1.Was the project in harmony with our major goals and purposes? Yes. We are
real estate lenders and developers, and it fit well within our portfolio.
2.Were the people involved of good character, and would we likely enjoy work-
ing with them? Although we had just met them, their references were positive,
and we were willing to give it a go, knowing we could remain lenders only if we
chose to do so.
3.Did the project make sense as explained? Yes, the proposed lots were in high
demand, and the views from the property were exceptional.
4.Did it promise returns equal to, or better than, our target rates? Yes. The
owners were willing to pay our standard hard-money rates.
5.Did we have, or could we hire, the skill to do the project? We saw the owners
to be a bit weak in their ability to complete the project, but they had plenty of
equity to insure their performance. We were content we had the skills on our
team, even if it turned out that they didn’t.
6.Did we have the capital required? Yes. We had the money on deposit to make
the loan and knew we could borrow to complete the improvements, if necessary.
7.Did we have the time to successfully oversee the project? Yes. The project
was close to home and could be spread across our existing staff, without over-
loading anyone.
8.Did it provide at least three acceptable exit strategies? Yes: (a) get paid off as
agreed; (b) complete the project in partnership with the existing owners; or (c)
foreclose on the property and sell it or complete the development ourselves.
9.Could we live with the worst case scenario, and was it within our risk profile?
The answer turned out to be “No,” because we discovered the property did not
yet have a deeded right of way for access. Although a contract was in place
with the neighbor to provide access, it contained no deadline for doing so. This
was a deal breaker for us. It threw us outside of our risk profile because we
couldn’t get title insurance without deeded access to the property.
10.Is it a win/win for everyone concerned? No. Because of the problem with the
access, it was not a win for us.
So, how did we solve the problems identified in numbers nine and ten (above)?
We renegotiated the terms of our proposed loan agreement with the owners. We
knew that we had legal grounds for getting the access from the neighbor. If it
took a year longer under the worst case scenario to acquire the access by litigation,
we simply needed a way to be compensated for our added exposure. Our solution
was this: In addition to our loan fees, and as an offset for our additional risk, the
owners agreed to grant us a 35 percent ownership interest in the property.
It took us ten months to acquire the access, at which time we sold the prop-
erty for a $3.35 million gain. The check in the envelope was our 35 percent
share of the net profit.
Sometimes opportunities must be massaged a bit to discover the real gems
lurking beneath the surface.
(T+E) “The Sum of Talent and Equity”
This is the mathematics of synergy. One plus one is greater than two. Talent is
wasted without equity, and equity tends to dissipate without talent. However,
properly combined, T+E equals pure power. While it may be true that it some-
times takes money to make money, my experience tells me that of the two, talent
or equity, talent is somewhat more important in building and maintaining
wealth. For example, who wouldn’t want to have the talent of Warren Buffett
managing one’s equities? Of course, Mr. Buffett is not for hire. I understand it is
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 61
often difficult to acquire Berkshire Hathaway stock because Buffett’s talent has
proven so exceptional that the current owners rarely sell their shares. I see that
as an undeniable testament to talent. The stock market at large would throw
billions of dollars at Mr. Buffett to have him get the results his talent has
achieved for his investors.
There is an old adage that states, “When money meets experience, the expe-
rience gets the money, and the money gets the experience.” I have found that
money (or equity) will flock to anyone who demonstrates an ability to protect
it and cause it to grow. So, let’s consider the value of talent.
T “Talent”
The New Oxford American Dictionary defines talent as aptitude, gift, knack,
technique, ability, expertise, capacity, and faculty; strength, forte, genius, skill,
and artistry.
It is easy to see that Mr. Buffett has all of these elements of talent on his
team. I refer to the Buffett team because in today’s business environment, things
move too fast and are too technical for any individual to successfully compete
against a talented team. I must admit it took me a while to realize this glaring
truth. As a self-employed “S,” within Rich Dad’s CASHFLOW Quadrant®
, I took
pride in doing everything myself. I remember the day it finally dawned on me
that others could actually do some things better than I could. An employee, to
whom I had reluctantly delegated a task, not only completed it ahead of sched-
ule, but did it better than I would have done and in a way I would not have con-
sidered. I felt a huge weight lift off of my shoulders as I realized that it wasn’t
all up to me anymore.
Since that glorious day of independence, I have devoted much of my time to
building project teams that consist of the best players I can find. Team building
became the key for my move from the “S” (self employed) to the “B” (business
owner) quadrant (see Robert Kiyosaki’s book, CASHFLOW Quadrant). The re-
sults have been astounding. With an in-house staff of less than ten people and
outsourced “partners” of perhaps another dozen, I am now able to manage fif-
teen companies, nearly six hundred investor accounts, and as many as twenty
projects at a time. It sometimes takes my breath away to see how productive
our team has become. There are weeks when we close dozens of real estate
transactions of one kind or another. I am so proud of my people for the way
they produce and for the pride they take in the quality of their work.
62 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Here is a snapshot of the team we assembled for the “million dollar” closing:
1.The previous owners, who became our partners.
2.My business partner, Reed, is our systems guy. I believe every team must
have Reed’s equivalent to truly excel. He takes care of all of the details re-
quired to run our businesses, such as communication systems, information
systems, and personnel systems. The genius of his systems organizes our
staff to handle every detail of every project and to respond to otherwise im-
possible deadlines.
3.My support staff, including our receptionist, Lindsey, my administrative as-
sistant, Johanne, Renee who runs our document department, Lincoln, who
operates our real estate company, Julie, Dan and Victor in accounting and
Lila, our file clerk.
4.Our private investor clients, who, in part, provide the capital we use to fund
our loans and acquisitions.
5.Civil engineers to design the proposed subdivision, roads, and utility systems.
6.Lawyers to advise, to draft documents, and to litigate if necessary to secure
the needed right of way.
7.Accountants to keep accurate records, establish budgets, and give tax guidance.
8.Title officers to work through issues of boundary lines, easements, legal de-
scriptions, and in resolving the right-of-way issue.
9.City officials, who worked with us to approve our proposed development
and who helped formalize the needed right of way.
Each potential investment requires unique talent. I encourage you to learn
what is needed for a given project and build a team made up of those who have
spent their lives honing exceptional, fundamental skills that qualify them to be
part of your team. I don’t know who plays on Mr. Buffett’s team, but I would
wager with confidence that they are people of outrageous talent. After proving
the talent of your team, and with a few wins to your record, you, too, should
find it relatively easy to attract all of the equity you need to become wealthy.
E “Equity”
Definition: value, worth; ownership, rights, and proprietorship (New Oxford
American Dictionary)
Having said that equity is perishable without talent, let me now say that eq-
uity is everything when financing real estate—once one has the talent to activate
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 63
the equity. Equity leads to net worth on your balance sheet. Equity is the symbol
of entrepreneurial wealth. Equity is capital, and understanding the role of equity
is a key to raising capital.
I also view equity as paper wealth. Currency is paper. Stock shares are paper.
In real estate, the difference between the value of the property and the debt on
the property is paper equity. Mortgages are paper assets for those who own the
notes and have the rights to receive the payments made by borrowers.
There are two segments of the real estate business where I have learned to
use equity in unique ways to achieve outstanding results.
The first is using equity as a tool in the “equity marketing” arena covered in
Chapter 22 and the second is real estate paper, or private mortgages. In each of
these realms, equity is applied in specific formulas to accelerate the accumula-
tion of personal wealth.
Let’s look at the second part of equity—the private paper portion. Private
mortgage paper is created by converting the seller’s equity into financing for
the buyer. A private note comes into existence when a seller “carries back,” or
in other words, loans equity to a buyer in the form of seller financing or when
an owner pledges equity as collateral for money loaned against the property.
Since all seller equity is capital, under our definition, seller equity provides one
of the most convenient and effective sources of financing for the purchase of
the seller’s property. Think about it: all seller equity is part of a huge pool of
potential financing for the building of your portfolio. Once you know how to
use seller financing, it is like having a pre-approved credit line for millions of
dollars just waiting to be tapped.
When I purchase real estate, I have trained myself to look to the seller’s eq-
uity first and foremost for financing. In the overwhelming majority of the prop-
erties we have bought over the years, seller financing played some role. Even in
the best of markets, when bank financing is plentiful, I prefer to use private fi-
nancing, for many reasons.
The Benefits of Private Financing—For the Buyer
1.Negotiable. Whereas banks and mortgage companies usually dictate the
terms of their loans, a private note can include any clause the buyer and
seller might agree to, such as lower interest rates, alternative collateral, ir-
regular payment schedules to match income fluctuations, and payments tied
to the performance of the property or project, to name a few.
2.Always available. Lending goes in cycles, and supplies of mortgage money
sometimes dry up. Private financing is always available because there is con-
stant equity in certain properties in the marketplace.
64 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
3.Not credit driven. Private financing may be available, even if a credit score is
low, income is difficult to verify, or debt ratios are high.
4.No aggregate limit. Once the average borrower has a few loans outstanding,
institutional lenders may restrict further borrowing. There is no set limit to
what a real estate investor can borrow privately.
5.Flexible loan-to-value ratios. Banks and mortgage companies have set limits
on loan-to-value ratios (LTVs), but it is possible to borrow 100 percent of
the purchase price of the property from the owner with private financing.
6.A ship for rough seas. In tough times, institutions have historically been rigid
in their default and foreclosure procedures. When making payments to a pri-
vate party who doesn’t want the property back, it is possible to re-negotiate
terms, extend deadlines, and in general, work together to get through the
storm. Equity is preserved for both parties, and in the process, creates an-
other win/win.
These advantages of private financing for the buyer are clear, but I am often
asked why sellers would carry back. What’s in it for the seller?
Benefits of Private Financing—For the Seller
1.Providing financing for a buyer in a slow market might make the property
sell quicker.
2.By making it easier for the buyer to qualify for financing, sellers often get a
higher price for the property.
3.A seller carry-back sale is usually considered an installment sale by the IRS,
and any gain on the sale is deferred until the principal portion of the loan is
received. Properly structured, an installment sale can push the tax conse-
quences of the sale many years into the future (See Internal Revenue Code
Section 453i).
4.The seller earns income from the interest portion of the payment. The rates
of interest paid by buyers on private mortgages are usually higher than the
rates paid by banks on certificates of deposit. This means that a seller can
earn more money on a carry-back loan than he or she could by selling the
property for cash and depositing the money in a CD at the bank. This is es-
pecially a boon to sellers who are of retirement age. It is as though they con-
vert their home equity into an annuity of sorts.
5.A private note, properly structured, is legal tender. The seller can borrow
against the note or use it for a down payment on his next property or even
sell it for cash if desired. Selling a note for cash may result in the seller re-
ceiving less than the full face amount of the note.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 65
66 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: How Private Financing
Can Work for You
As an example, I purchased a condo from a private party who owned the unit
free and clear. They agreed to accept a $20,000 down payment and to carry a
note of $78,000 at 7.5 percent for twenty years. The monthly principal and interest
payment was to be $628.36. I asked for a clause in the note that provided for all
payments made in the first year to be allocated to principal, such that the interest
rate for the first year of the note was effectively 0 percent. The seller would still re-
ceive the same monthly income, while I could prepay as much of the balance as I
desired, within twelve months, without interest. However, 7.5 percent interest would
begin accruing against the unpaid balance on the first anniversary of the loan. That
one simple clause, written into the private note, shortened the amortization of the
note from 240 months to 205.68 months, a savings of $21,565.76. You might note
that the savings exceeded my down payment. In other words, the zero interest
clause was, in essence, an agreement by the seller to rebate my down payment if I
paid on the note to maturity.
I trust that now you can see how equity in exchanges and equity in paper,
combined with talent, can turbocharge your investment results. I believe this
is one of the most important benefits of understanding and using wealth for-
mulas. Unless you were born into money or win the lottery, learning how to
harness various forms of equity that currently belongs to someone else, will
likely be your fastest road to riches.
Now, before we get to the last part of the formula, let’s consider what we
have learned so far:
Wealth is our goal—to be wealthy is to get out of the rat race
X stands for the balanced exchange of value and for the context of the real
estate exchange marketplace
O is for opportunity that is all around us, all of the time, just waiting to be
multiplied by the synergy of
Talent plus
Equity
Looking once again at the million-dollar deal, let’s take an inventory of
what we had when the borrowers walked into our office with their problem.
The property owners were about to lose a chunk of Wealth in foreclosure. We
were prepared to provide an eXchange of value using our cash and Equity
Marketing formulas. We were presented with an Opportunity to help someone
else solve a problem and to profit by doing so. We had the Talent, and they
had the Equity to provide safety for our capital. It would seem the stars were
all aligned, right? Wrong! There is one more critical element to the formula
that I am convinced makes all the difference in today’s business environment.
I call it the “K” factor.
K “Speed/Time”
In mathematics, a factor is defined as a number or algebraic expression by
which another is exactly divisible (New Oxford American Dictionary). You may
notice that in my wealth formula, the product of everything else is divided by
K. K is the last operation that defines the ultimate sum of the wealth. So what
could possibly be so important as to warrant this key spot? The K is critical to
the equation because to me it represents time multiplied and compressed, as
with the metric system K, which is the symbol for kilo, or one thousand. How
can I do one thousand times more, a thousand times faster? In other words,
SPEED! How much ground can be covered in the least amount of time?
We live in a world where transactional time frames are being condensed and
collapsed by the effects of technology. What once took months to accomplish
now takes seconds or no measurable time at all. When Benjamin Franklin lived
in Paris as the U.S. ambassador to France, he communicated with his family
and government through letters. Those letters took up to six months to arrive
in the United States by boat from Paris. Today telephone, e-mail, text messaging,
and facsimile technologies make such communications instant. We can some-
times do almost everything in almost no time at all. To compete and succeed
today, we must prepare to accomplish ever more in ever shorter time frames in
every way possible.
Even though all of the stars seemed to be aligned in our million dollar deal,
there was one glaring exception. If we couldn’t salvage the owner’s Wealth by
funding the transaction within twenty-four hours, the Opportunity for eX-
change of value would expire, and all of the owner’s Equity would be lost, re-
gardless of how much Talent we had as a team. The key was the need for speed.
Without speed, all else was of no value. Without the K factor, everything that
preceded it in the formula was meaningless. Anything divided by zero is zero.
What was the key to our speed?
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 67
68 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
The Keys to Speed
1.Private capital—the money system. Because we control private capital, there
was no need to make a loan application to a bank, order a lengthy appraisal,
wait for a meeting of the loan committee, or wade through the rivers of red
tape surrounding institutional transactions. In short, we were working in a
niche market where their bureaucratic structures knock the banks out of
the box. They simply could not compete with us on the basis of speed, and
our client was indeed in need of speed.
2.Technology—the mechanical system. Under Reed’s direction, our office is
wired with high-speed Internet, and we maintain accounts that connect us
to all kinds of data sources. These allow us to rapidly download title infor-
mation, zoning maps, tax rolls, market information, property histories, satel-
lite photos, and demographic data pertinent to our decision-making
processes. We can access much of this information instantly or communicate
very quickly with others who may be in possession of electronic versions of
the data that can be instantly forwarded to us. We can build a loan file in a
matter of hours instead of weeks.
3.Talent—the training system. Our staff has a broad scope of talents and disci-
plines necessary to gather and process information, create documents, com-
municate with vested parties, and support all others involved in the process.
We work as a team. We function as a whole, slicing and dicing the workload
and delivering the intended results in dramatically condensed time frames.
4.Relationships—the people system. We consciously invest in people. We do
all we can on a day-to-day basis to treat others as we would like to be treated.
We make every effort to accommodate others when called upon. We have
an absolute rule in our businesses that requires telling the truth and keeping
our word to everyone at all times. By making this investment in others, we
find that they are there for us when we have a need for speed and they readily
respond to our requests. We see these people as extensions of our team’s tal-
ent and resources. Our network of connected people is one of our greatest
assets. We also have an unbreakable rule: No matter what else is right with a
transaction, if the people piece is wrong, we walk away. As Robert Kiyosaki
so aptly teaches, “You can’t do a good deal with a bad partner.” The guidelines
we have set and hold to in our companies protect the integrity of our teams.
Our people abide by such high standards that we rarely need to fire anyone.
If the bad guys slip under the radar to find a way onto our team, they soon
leave because they are made so uncomfortable by the culture that everyone
else upholds. We have zero tolerance for lying, cheating, stealing, gossiping,
petty politics, and sexual harassment. We intend for our business relation-
ships to last for a lifetime and create an environment that is mutually re-
spectful, safe, clean, fun, and productive.
Time is the investor’s friend in an appreciating market. As we say,
“Appreciation will cover a multitude of investor sins.” However in a down
market, time is the enemy, and the need for speed, for precision, and for
bulletproof decision making becomes even more critical. Speed is often
the difference between success and failure, especially in a contracting
real estate market.
Many modern tools allow us to cover more ground in less time. I encourage
you to use cell phones, computers, e-mail, text messaging, a paperless office,
video conferencing, and anything else that gets more out of the time allotted.
To illustrate how valuable this can be, one of my favorite tech tools is a digital
voice recorder. I keep it in my pocket most of the time. When I have a creative
idea or think of something I need to do, I make a quick note of it on the micro
recorder. Because I can talk faster than I write, this high tech tool consolidates
what would be a scattered pile of sticky notes into one location. I use the
recorded notes to compile my daily to-do list. This habit keeps important ideas
and tasks from slipping through the cracks. It also reduces my stress levels
considerably because my mind is free of all of those details. In addition, I keep
an audio journal of important thoughts, events, and new things I learn. It is
amazing how valuable some of that information is at a later date, especially
when imbued with the emotion of the moment, as captured in my voice. It ac-
celerates the learning process and the implementation of new ideas. Perhaps
the most important benefit of all is that it saves so much of my time, which is
irreplaceable.
So, there you have it! W = ( XO ( T+E ) ) / K. Wealth is XOTEK. To make it
easy to remember, say it phonetically. It sounds like “Wealth is exotic.” Now
you have your first formula for achieving exotic personal wealth.
On a bright spring morning in May, a few days after receiving the million
dollar check, I walked down the hall to my office. It was my birthday. I noticed
a document taped to the door at eye level. It was a copy of a deposit slip with a
printout of my discretionary business account balance. It had been posted there
by my accounting staff as a birthday surprise. It showed available funds of
$1,217,674.44. All of the bills were paid. There were no strings attached to that
money.
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 69
70 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
It struck me that I had more than a million dollars in cash with which I could
do whatever I wanted. I sat down at my desk and again let the full impact of the
moment settle in on me. My thoughts were strangely drawn once more to those
times in the past when I struggled to learn the secrets of abundance. Of course,
I felt joy, peace, gratitude, and a sense of well being, but most of all, I felt vindi-
cated for every effort I had made through years of hard work, tireless study, and
the gathering of experiences that collectively prepared me to close million-
dollar transactions. A sense of excitement welled up inside of me. I knew it was
only the beginning because, now, I had the formula for replicating the same
success over and over again.
I glanced at the equation I had scratched on the pad of paper a few days ear-
lier. I felt so utterly blessed. I thought of thousands of other people who are out
there in the world, going through the same process I had been through; strug-
gling to find the right combination, the right recipe, the right formula for their
own success. I picked up the piece of paper and with a smile, folded it and care-
fully tucked it in my pocket. I knew it would come in handy soon, when I would
have a chance to share it with someone else who was diligently searching for
the way to XOTEK Wealth.
Ways to Learn More
www.waynelpalmer.com
www.nce1031.com
A soon-to-be-published book on real estate formulas, by Wayne Palmer
Wayne Palmer is widely regarded as a master of the creative structuring
of real estate acquisition and financing, using notes and other forms of
real estate paper, together with 1031 Equity Marketing formulas. As the
owner and manager of National Note of Utah, LC, and several other com-
panies, Wayne is a Certified Real Estate Note Appraiser, Certified Cash
Flow Master Broker, a Licensed Continuing Education Provider, and holds
the Equity Marketing Specialist (EMS) designation with the National Council of Exchangors.
He has been involved in real estate development since 1978 in Utah, Idaho, Arizona, Hawai’i,
and Minnesota.
Ross is Ken McElroy’s partner in their business MC Properties. Kim and I are
often financial partners with Ken and Ross in a number of their projects and
have done very well financially, even in tough economic times.
There are three primary reasons why our investments with Ross do so well.
The first reason is that he is a builder. He understands the ins and outs of the con-
struction industry. Second, he is a property manager. This is important because
the key to long-term investing in real estate is professional property management.
And third, Ross is exceptional at finance by managing the ratios between debt, eq-
uity, and expenses. When it comes to real estate investing, he is the complete pack-
age. On top of that, he is a great guy. He is fair and honest.
In 2002, when the Tucson apartment market was hot, Ross’s background al-
lowed us not only to do well buying existing apartment houses but also building
new apartment houses. One of our first investments together was the purchase of
an existing apartment complex his company was managing. This gave us an ad-
vantage because we knew the numbers were honest—which is important since
most pro forma numbers provided by realtors are lies. Second, the property had
an additional ten acres of vacant land. Once we bought the existing apartment
house, our next step was to begin construction on an additional one hundred units
on the vacant land. Then with the increased rents a few years later, Ross refinanced
the property, and Kim and I got all of our initial investment money back. This
4Ross MCCALLISTER
Profits from the Ground Up
71
means each month we receive a check from the positive cash flow, and Kim and I
have zero invested in the project. If you do the math, this means Kim and I have
an infinite return on our money. In layman’s terms, an infinite return is truly
money for nothing . . . every month.
This is why Kim and I love being partners with Ross McCallister and Ken
McElroy.
—Robert Kiyosaki
P erhaps you’ve already read and maybe even re-read Rich Dad Poor Dad by
Robert Kiyosaki, as well as my partner Ken McElroy’s book, The Advanced
Guide to Real Estate Investing, and now you are ready to take the plunge and in-
vest in real estate on your own. That’s probably why you bought this book writ-
ten by real estate professionals, each of whom have been earning their livings
in real estate for decades.
There are pages in this book that are full of tremendous opportunities and
innovative ways to make money in real estate. But one avenue of investment
you may not have thought of and may want to consider is to develop your own
project from the ground up.
The profits you have heard about from real estate development are mind
boggling, and if you are like most people, the numbers leave you frothing at the
mouth for a piece of the development pie. Yes, there is tremendous profit to be
made from real estate development, but as with any high reward venture there
is also the possibility of tremendous financial losses if you let your emotions
override good judgment, or if you don’t know what you are doing.
In this chapter I will outline some of the steps you need to take to evaluate a
development opportunity, steps I’ve gleaned from my expertise in developing
apartment communities during the past three decades and from some twenty-
plus projects of about four thousand units. And because my experience is pri-
marily in apartment development, that is what we will talk about. However,
these fundamentals apply to any commercial development, such as office or re-
tail, and to any size apartment community, be it four or four hundred units.
For me, development from the ground up is the most exciting way to invest
in real estate. There are few professional accomplishments more rewarding
than to see a project go from conception to reality. And it’s even better when
that project produces positive financial results. Yet, with that said, nothing can
be more frustrating than working for years (yes, years!) to start your project
and battling through environmental and governmental regulations, market con-
72 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 73
ditions, financial institutions, and your own continuous questioning about
whether all this frustration and risk is worth it. That side of the business is a re-
ality, too, even for those of us who have many projects already under our belts.
I know you can see yourself as the owner of that “perfect” corner lot at Main
and Better Main, graced with a structure and a monument sign bearing the
name you have been dreaming about for years. Maybe it’s (insert your dream
name here!) in large letters on the monument sign in the front. You can see all
the happy families living there, and you can hear the ka-ching of the cash regis-
ter as the rents roll in every month. But before you build that sign or take that
cash to the bank, let’s talk about some of the decisions you must make first be-
fore you consider embarking upon this adventure.
The main lesson I have learned in thirty years of apartment
development is that each project is unique and different. Each will
bring its own set of opportunities and challenges.
Before you call me when you are in the middle of your next development
and say, “But Ross, you didn’t tell me I would need an environmental impact
study on the duck-billed humpback pygmy field mouse!” remember, I did tell
you that something always comes up to make your project harder than you
thought it would be.
A Clear Vision
From the beginning, for any project to be truly successful, you need to have a
clear vision of what you want to build and how developing this property meets
your own objectives. That means you also need to actually have objectives—or
better said, you need a solid understanding what you want this project to
achieve. One of the reasons MC Companies—the company Ken and I own—has
been successful in development is that we have an infrastructure in place within
our firm to develop, construct, manage, and profitably operate multifamily com-
munities. We are careful to select communities large enough to support an on-
site staff, earn economies of scale, and that fit within our investment model.
We are careful to keep our egos in check and build for the market rather than
for our own self esteem.
When we take on a new development, we draw upon each and every one of
those disciplines—development, construction, and management—from inception
to ensure that we make good decisions in the present because we know they
TIP
will impact the future. This inclusive team approach is crucial to the successful
development and operation of our multifamily communities. If you do not have
expertise in all these areas, then it’s in your best interest to create a team whose
members do have the expertise in each of these fields before you venture into
multifamily investments, whether you are building a duplex or four hundred
units.
Develop for the Long Term
Without exception we build communities with the full intent of operating them
once they are done. If the market is strong and the right buyer knocks on our
door after the development is complete, we have an alternate option to make
money on the investment, but we don’t enter a project with this end in mind. It
takes many months, or years, from the time we create the vision of our finished
community to the time when we collect even a dollar in rent from the first ten-
ant. To predict what the market will be like at the finish line is not always pos-
sible. But if you plan to own and operate the project after it is built and use
those numbers in your pro forma, you begin with a more solid platform—a
better business premise—from which to launch your development, lease it up,
and operate the community profitably.
Let’s look at the other scenario—from the point of view of building and selling
rather than building and operating. What if the market changes from the time
that you planned your development to the time it is built and ready for you to
operate? If you have not planned on operating it from the beginning, the likeli-
hood of you recognizing the changes, knowing how they affect your project,
and then making the necessary adjustments are slim. In the end, you may find
yourself holding an obsolete project or one that would require some serious
adjustments to fit the new market conditions.
My examples are not entirely hypothetical. In the spring of 2006 the apart-
ment market was hot, and any project completed could be sold for a big profit.
Many developers began projects with the idea that they could cash in upon
completion with an immediate sale. So, thousands of units were developed and
built over the next two years. In 2008, banks had changed their qualification
and ratios for loans, and their credit criteria changed dramatically, too. Investor
money was not readily available, either. Economic conditions had deteriorated,
resulting in higher unemployment and a tight economy. The market for new
apartments was, at best, weak. Investors were demanding lower purchase prices
to compensate for the slower economy.
74 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 75
Consequently, many developers found themselves sitting on their shiny new
properties in a down economy, with cautious investors, reluctant banks, and a
weak market for their product. All the assumptions they had made two years
prior were based on factors that no longer applied. Because they didn’t develop
their projects with the idea that they were going to operate them, they created
a scenario dependent on a sale and ripe for financial disaster!
Ken and I have avoided this situation because we plan from the start to op-
erate the communities once they are completed, and we make sure all our ac-
tions are consistent with our investment objectives. Consequently, we have
been able to adjust to market changes and ride out the difficult times, all the
while building long-term value.
I don’t believe that it is possible to hit a real estate cycle perfectly.
If you do, it’s luck. Building value from real estate development over the long
term takes skill and expertise. It also takes an operator’s eye to recognize
market shifts and a mind-set that is open to change.
Your Market Niche Focus
Just as you simply must have your objectives for a development in place, you
must decide which market niche your apartment project, or other project, will
fill. Here are the basics I consider when looking for a market niche:
• What are the demographics of the area you are considering?
• What is the salary level of the area?
• Is there a college population looking for more off-campus housing, and is
that the type of community I want to run?
• Where are the major employment centers?
• Are new businesses and employment being generated in the area?
• What other communities are in the area that a prospective tenant will con-
sider, and are they the same class as the community you are developing, that
is, luxury, blue-collar, or subsidized housing?
• What can I build, and how much rent can I charge?
• Will I enjoy owning and managing the community?
In 1999, we took over the development of an eighty-unit townhome commu-
nity in a town with lots of retirees. Twenty-four units had been built, and only
two had sold in more than one year. When we inspected the project, it was ob-
vious why the sales weren’t happening. Each unit had two bedrooms with a
TIP
detached garage. When homeowners came home, they would park in the garage
and would have to walk sometimes hundreds of feet through the property to
enter their front doors. A review of other competing townhomes for sale in the
area revealed they all had attached garages. Homeowners park, get out of their
cars, and take a few steps right into their homes. Is it any surprise why an
elderly buyer would prefer the competition?
When we took the project over, we bought the two sold units back and con-
verted the entire community to an apartment project, offering it for rent, not to
retirees, but to the people who worked in the town. We completed construction
of the eighty units, leased the property to full occupancy within six months,
and operated the project at a profit until we sold it four years later. That’s un-
derstanding the niche and developing for it. The original developer of the town-
homes clearly did not understand the market niche, which meant he did not
understand the buyer.
The most beautiful project imaginable will not rent if it’s built in the wrong
place. A luxury apartment community may be your dream, but if you build it in
a blue collar area, you won’t be able to lease the community or be able to charge
enough rent to make the economics work. Matching the needs of the commu-
nity with the project you develop is crucial to your success. Research and know
your demographics before you proceed. Only research will give you the per-
spective that you need before you take another step forward.
Where to Build Your Community
You’ve most likely heard it before in this book and likely everywhere else: loca-
tion, location, location. As you are standing on that dusty lot, filled with years of
accumulated trash, a couple of homeless camps, and overgrown weeds, envision
where the main entrance to your community will be located. Pretend you are
driving in and driving out. Look around you. What do you see? If the view is of
an industrial complex across the street, a junkyard, or poorly maintained build-
ings, don’t just brush it off. Signs like that generally mean the area isn’t going to
entice many people to choose your community no matter how beautiful you make
it. On the other hand, sometimes negative factors like these can be minimized.
We developed an apartment project on a site where our due diligence revealed
that a processing plant was located just half a mile away. The plant took used
grease from restaurants and processed it to be reused. When the plant was op-
erating, it stunk to high heaven. But the site was an excellent infill location in a
76 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 77
good school district. The clincher was when we discovered that the processing
plant was in the midst of implementing rigid pollution-control measures. We
were able to pull off a really nice, affordable apartment community in an under-
served area with confidence. Research paid off.
While a panoramic view of the mountains or ocean may not be possible, or
even relevant to your community plans, don’t forget to envision what residents
will see and feel coming home. Is it welcoming? Does it feel safe? Would you
want to call that home after a long day at work?
Before Beginning a Multifamily Development Project,
Ask Yourself These Questions
Lifestyle and Convenience
• Will your community have good exposure to drive-by traffic? Heavy drive-by traffic
is a plus when you are trying to attract potential tenants, but possibly a negative
for residents concerned about traffic noise. On the other hand, the cutest, most
affordable community in town could suffer high vacancy rates if it is located on a
street no one can find, even with a blitz of advertising.
• How far from the major thoroughfares will your community be, and how easy is
the access to them? Is that important for the type of community you are planning
to build?
• How easy will it be for residents to get to work, school, shopping, the movies, etc.?
• Where are the schools in relation to your community? What is the reputation and
rating of those schools? What are the transportation options to and from those
schools?
• What are the employment opportunities in the area? What mass transit is available
to help your residents get to work?
• Is the major downtown area easily accessible?
Social Amenities
• Are parks, movie complexes, theaters, arcades, and sports facilities an acceptable
distance from your proposed community?
• What is the “flavor” of the part of town you are considering?
• How does your apartment community plan fit in with the area?
Neighborhood Amenities
• Is shopping in close proximity?
• Is a major grocery store nearby? It matters for those 10 p.m. milk runs.
Development of Your Site
By this point, you understand that you must choose a site based on your demo-
graphic research. Now consider your site from the development perspective.
How easy will bringing the project, literally, out of the ground actually be? This
is perhaps the most critical analysis you will need to do, and it is the one that
will have the biggest effect on your development costs. Is the site fairly flat,
with a minimum of site prep work required? Or does the site have some geo-
graphical features that are interesting but challenging?
Flat sites are wonderful, and they typically will allow for the highest density.
That is, they allow you to construct the most units per acre. Drainage becomes
your biggest concern with flat sites because water will not flow off them without
effort. On the other hand, a lovely, hilly piece of land can make for an interesting
project. But on the downside, density will be a challenge, and the geography it-
self can run up the site development and infrastructure costs very quickly. Foun-
dational structures like retaining walls can take a huge chunk of your
development budget in the blink of an eye. The point is, each site provides its
own set of challenges and opportunities. You need to understand how they af-
fect the number of units you can build and at what costs.
When considering the location of your community, consult with your local
governing bodies regarding zoning and other development requirements as
soon as you can. Your local government development department can help you
determine the required process for gaining permission to develop your project.
Be wary, though. I’ve found cities and counties are notorious for seeing new
development as a significant revenue source, and they look for opportunities to
solve their problems and budget overruns at your expense. For example, some
will make approval of your project contingent upon the city or the town getting
concessions from you. You need to understand the law and the regulations, so
you know what a government jurisdiction can and cannot legitimately require.
Do not take their word as gospel without checking. And most of all, be prepared
to do battle on every issue.
Can you tell that I speak from experience? During the approval process for
one project we developed, the city initially required us to build a traffic median
in the middle of a six lane street—the major highway through town—with the
excuse that the median was required to provide safe access to the proposed
apartment community. Medians are not cheap! We were going to incur several
hundred thousand dollars in off-site expenses that threatened to jeopardize
the entire deal. However, after many sleepless nights, a great deal of contem-
78 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
plation, and consultation with our development team, we were able to deter-
mine that, although we were required to augment the street improvements to
provide safe access, we could do it by slightly redesigning the entrance to the
project and re-striping the street, at a cost of only $3,000.
Just as important as knowing how to work with the city or town is knowing
how to work with the utility companies. On your to-do list should be checking
with the utility companies that will serve your community for availability of
their services, hook-up fees, development fees, and monthly service rates. I’ve
seen too many novices get surprised by utility access and hook-up issues. An-
other often overlooked detail is checking on the possible future infrastructure
requirements of your site. For example, if your site is on a heavily traveled two-
lane street, and the city decides to widen it to four or six lanes, you will be as-
sessed for your portion of the cost, and you will lose part of your site for the
right-of-way. Be prepared for these issues by knowing they can happen up front,
then plan your development accordingly.
Oh, and let’s not forget the remote possibility, which in some parts of the
country isn’t that remote, that your site could have archeological or environ-
mental significance. Find out what rules are governing those discoveries in ad-
vance of even buying the land. Remember, finding out that your site is the home
of those endangered duck-billed humpback pygmy field mice, or the next Machu
Picchu, could either kill your development entirely or put it on hold for an in-
definite period of time while experts complete expensive studies and develop
mitigation plans.
Another tip that every developer must know is the value of checking for any
riparian or wetland conditions on the property, as well as drainage, flooding
potential, and soil conditions. You don’t want your beautiful new community
to be in a lake when the summer rains come. And you don’t want to find your
buildings slowly—or not so slowly—sinking into the ground because of poor
soil conditions. When evaluating a site, you must consider all these factors. I
know there are quite a number of them, and I can’t stress enough that each site
has its own nuances. As a developer you must be prepared to spend the money
to do a proper evaluation. It’s pretty easy to see the cost implications if you
don’t.
Your Development Team
In our company, Ken and I have worked out clear guidelines regarding who will
handle which areas of development and management, based on our respective
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 79
professional backgrounds. At the same time, we constantly consult with each
other and make joint decisions.
You do not have the expertise to handle all the development, manage-
ment, and construction phases for the community you want to build. You need
to start by putting together a development team with the strongest expertise
in each area you can find.
We’re always certain to clarify up front and in writing who will be the team
leader and who will make the final decisions. That holds people accountable and
gives them ownership. It’s fine to use people you know, but this is not the time to
give your sister-in-law’s cousin his first break in the development business!
Your Architectural Team
The next person on your team will be your architect. Ideally, this will be some-
one you have worked with in the past and have traveled a lot of rocky roads to-
gether. This person will have the experience and relationships with the
governing jurisdiction to guide you through all the government requirements.
He or she will also coordinate all the other design professions that you need,
and will provide the site plan, design, and building elevations, unit plans, project
amenities, and construction drawings with specifications.
Other members of your development team that your architect will coordinate
include:
• Mechanical engineer who will design the plumbing and HVAC systems.
• Structural engineer who will design the foundations, the framing require-
ments, and the roofing system.
• Electrical engineer who will design both the underground electrical systems
and the building electrical requirements.
• Civil engineer who will design the grading requirements for your site, in-
cluding drainage, parking lot, and zoning compliances.
Your Contractor
The contractor will be the guy or gal who is going to take all these drawings,
plans, and specifications and construct your community. Think of him/her as
TIP
80 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 81
translating the two-dimensional plans into three-dimensional buildings, from
overseeing the grading of the site all the way through handing over the keys of
the finished units. You will want a general contractor licensed in the state in
which you are building and who hires only licensed subcontractors in each trade
qualified to do the work. Reputation and past performance of the general con-
tractor will be your main guideline for this professional. Once chosen, you will
want to have a signed contract between you as the developer/owner and the
general contractor that will delineate the terms of the relationships including
compensation.
Common Construction Contracts
• Lump Sum or Fixed Price Contract—In this type of contract, the contractor
agrees to provide specified services for a specific price and receives this sum
upon completion of the project or according to a negotiated payment schedule. If
the actual costs of labor and materials are higher than the contractor’s estimate,
his profit will be reduced. If the actual costs are lower, the contractor will get more
profit. Either way, the cost to the developer/owner is the same.
• Cost Plus a Fixed Fee Contract—In this contract, you as the owner/developer
will pay the contractor the actual costs of construction plus a fee to the general
contractor. If the actual costs are higher than the estimate, the owner must pay the
additional amount. If the actual costs are lower, then the owner gets the savings.
• Guaranteed Maximum Price Contract—This contract states the owner/devel-
oper will pay for the costs like a Cost Plus contract, but the contractor will guar-
antee that the costs will not exceed a maximum amount. In the event that actual
costs are lower than the estimates, the owner keeps the savings. As costs rise,
the owner must pay for the additional costs up to the guaranteed maximum.
Thereafter the contractor pays.
The Construction Team
For as important as the general contractor is to the success of any project, un-
derstand that the success or failure of your construction relies heavily on the
expertise of the entire construction team. I cannot stress enough the importance
of hiring a qualified, financially stable contractor who employs a bright project
manager, assigns experienced superintendents, and hires excellent tradespeople.
Carefully scrutinize each person who will be involved with the construction of
your project; not only is that your prerogative, it’s your job. In addition to your
general contractor being licensed in the state of your project, he or she must
also be fully insured and be bondable. Another tip, and I know, everyone needs
to get their start somewhere, but give careful consideration before you agree to
allow your general contractor to break in a new superintendent or project man-
ager on your job. His limited experience in the field may cost you money and
may even jeopardize the quality of your finished product.
So just who constitutes a construction team? Your team should include a
strong project manager. It is this person’s responsibility, among other things, to
decide which subcontractors will be awarded the contract for the project and
to set the construction budget. The project manager studies the plans and spec-
ifications submitted by the architectural team and based on his or her experi-
ence will often suggest adjustments or changes in the plans. A few choice
suggestions made by a perceptive and confident project manager can save you
thousands of dollars in the construction budget without affecting the quality
or the appearance of the finished product.
Each project has at least one on-site superintendent, based on the size and
scope of the project. The superintendent is responsible for the day-to-day op-
erations of all the subcontracting trades who will be working on the project at
any given time. Superintendents set the schedule for the trades to ensure the
proper flow of work. There is a sequential order to construction; for example,
you don’t want the painters arriving before the drywallers have finished putting
up the walls. And you certainly want to make sure all the necessary site work—
such as grading, compacting, etc.—is done before the concrete folks come to
pour the building pads. This right-on-time kind of scheduling takes a person
who has been around the block and knows how long things take to complete. It
takes a person who knows what the demand is for the various trades and knows
the appropriate lead times. It also takes someone who can forcefully, yet pro-
fessionally, get you the best treatment from the subs.
Between the subcontractors, superintendents, and the project manager, this
construction team is responsible for continued communication with the archi-
tect and engineers and for attending to construction methods and details that
don’t always show up on the drawings, yet become obvious as construction is in
progress. They should also be in continual communication with the testing tech-
nicians, building inspectors, financial institution inspectors, and, of course, you
the owner/developer! Remember, this is your baby, and you cannot deny the
fact that you are ultimately responsible for the design and construction pros.
82 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
The project manager also has another very vital role, one you will come to
appreciate. He or she is the person responsible for keeping a close eye on the
construction budget. That involves closely monitoring if or when a particular
trade is out of sync with the budget, and making adjustments before the close
of the project. This is the person who looks out for your financial interests and
communicates with you to discuss any overages. In construction, things often
take longer and cost more than originally planned, so having a good project
manager with good communication skills is a real plus.
Where does the general contractor make his money? When you get your first
glimpse of a construction budget, you’ll notice a line item built in for a specified
percentage of the overall construction budget for the contractor’s overhead and
profit. Remember, construction costs are negotiated between you and the con-
tractor, so you need to understand all the components of the construction
budget, including direct costs for labor and materials, subcontractors, and gen-
eral conditions, as well as profit and overhead.
Finally, you are part of the construction team, too. It is up to you to use every
means available to make sure that the contractor builds the project correctly
and pays his bills.
This includes hiring third party quality-control inspectors; requiring proof
of payment for the materials and labor, such as lien waivers; and possibly re-
quiring a payment and performance bond.
Your Title Company
Title companies have been mentioned several times in this book, and here they
are again. Just as they play a role in acquiring existing property, they play a role
in new development, too. Here it is their job to hold all monies involved in the
transaction of the land transfer in escrow. They also provide a title report and
title insurance. The title company can help you by periodically checking to
make sure that the contractor is paying his bills and that no liens have been
filed against the project by a subcontractor. You don’t want to have your build-
ings almost completed only to find out that there is a lien on the property from
an unpaid sub. It happens!
Your Property Management Company
Contrary to what you might think, you’ll need a property management company,
even before your project breaks ground. It is the property management company
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 83
that will prepare the market analysis and determine the rents your community
can reasonably charge. From there they help you prepare a realistic operating
budget. The way management companies make their money is usually based
on a percentage of anticipated gross annual rents. Having an experienced prop-
erty management company has been a true key to our success. The market
knowledge and expertise it provides is something we would never dream of
doing without.
Your Financing Partner
Unless you are related to Daddy Warbucks or recently won the lottery (if that
describes you, let’s talk!), you will need to obtain financing for your project.
You may qualify for various forms of financing from governmentally controlled
financing, to commercial banks, to private money. All are viable and all come
with certain requirements.
It is possible to qualify for governmental or commercial bank loans that offer
development and construction financing. These lenders historically will lend
from 65 percent to 85 percent of the total cost of the project. The credit crunch
of 2008 has changed those lending percentages, and developers are required to
have more of their own cash in their deal, but regardless of the amount, those
capital sources are options. However, governmental or commercial bank lenders
will have a first mortgage priority, meaning that in the event of a default, they
get paid first. Their interest rates are based on the current market.
Another finance option is securing money from private lenders, meaning in-
dividuals wanting to invest in a real estate project as opposed to stocks or bonds.
If you have a successful track record and a convincing business plan/sales pack-
age for your proposed community, they will lend you the money with the con-
dition that they receive an interest payment as well as a percentage of the profits
from the operations of the completed project and any sales proceeds. Although
private lenders are typically more expensive than traditional lenders, they are
more flexible and may lend you a higher percentage of the project costs.
Given the scope of your project and your financial contacts, your funding
may possibly come from a combination of these sources, depending on how
you structure the financing. Most of the projects Ken and I work on are struc-
tured to obtain a commercial bank loan for approximately 67 percent of the
total amount needed for the project, with the remaining 33 percent contributed
as the equity, which may come from investors, our own funds, or both.
84 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Your Business Plan
Obtaining financing isn’t as easy as strolling into a bank with a good idea. It
takes much more than that. In reality, to obtain financing, you will need a busi-
ness plan. Business plans come in many shapes and sizes, and you can find nu-
merous templates for them all over the Internet. But let me cut to the chase
and tell you exactly what banks want to see. This eliminates all the unnecessary
fluff that they don’t read anyway. Here’s what you need to include in your busi-
ness plan:
• Executive Summary, which explains the purpose of the project and gives a
financial summary. You actually can write this first or last, but it’s always the
first few pages of your plan.
• Property Overview, which includes a description of the site, unit mix, floor
plans, site plan, elevations, and pictures of the site.
• Market Overview, which presents neighborhood features, city economics,
and the local apartment market.
• Financial Pro Forma, which includes development costs, construction costs,
and projected operations income and expenses.
• Developer résumé which highlights your credentials.
• Development team résumés, which highlight the credentials of your archi-
tect, engineers, and property managers.
Those are the components lenders care about and are the sections they read.
No amount of fluff or page volume will make up for a poor job assembling the
details in these sections of the plan. Complete analysis and a realistic business
case surrounding that analysis have a better chance of receiving funding. A
sketchy plan based on incomplete research and analysis with blue sky projec-
tions won’t. Not only is this document obviously important in your getting the
financing for your project, the exercise of doing it helps articulate and establish
your goals and objectives. It is the exercise that helps you determine if your
project can ultimately be profitable, and let’s face it, you should want to know
that as much as the lender does.
Will You Qualify for a Loan?
Ken and I have spent our entire careers building our credit and financial stand-
ing, as well as building our network of contacts within banking and investing
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 85
circles. These bankers and investors know our reputation and qualifications
and are willing to entertain a development proposal that we present to them.
Our track record and financial strength give banks and investors confidence
that we can complete and operate a financially viable project. When searching
for financing for your project, whatever your sources, you can count on them
scrutinizing your background particularly in these areas:
• What is your financial strength? If you are building the community under the
umbrella of a company, what is the financial strength of the entire company?
• What is your development experience? Have you successfully built numerous
projects before, or is this your first time at bat? If this is your first develop-
ment, what attributes and strengths do you have that will put to rest concerns
about your experience?
• Have you had one or more previous projects fall through in some way?
• What are the backgrounds, experiences, and strengths of your development
team? Are they all solid and strong, or are there any weak links that could
potentially cause hesitation from the source of your loan?
• What is the source of the equity you will be bringing to the table for this proj-
ect? How much of your own money are you willing to invest in the project?
The stronger your answers to each of these questions, the better the terms
and rate of loan you will be able to qualify for. A lender will ask these questions
regardless of the type of loan you are seeking—a construction loan or a perma-
nent loan. And that leads us to our next subject.
Short-Term Loan vs.
Long-Term Loan
A construction loan is a short-term loan with a term length from six to thirty-
six months, depending on the size of your project and construction budget.
Construction loans usually have variable interest rates and are interest-only
loans. The lending institution holds your project as collateral during the course
of the loan. In the event of default, you will lose your property. Construction
loans are also typically personally guaranteed by the developer, meaning the
bank has recourse to your personal assets in the event of default.
Unlike with other loans, with a short-term construction loan the lender will
not hand over to you the full amount of the loan all at once. Rather, you’ll receive
it in monthly payments based on the percent of completion of your project.
This process is called a draw, and each month your construction team will sub-
86 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
mit an application to the lending institution. The lending institution will send
out an inspector to verify the work is completed as stated in a workmanlike
fashion and that all local government inspections are complete and approved.
Only with the inspector’s approval will the lender issue that month’s draw.
After construction is completed, then you, the developer, will need to obtain
a permanent loan. The permanent loan is long-term financing that will require
a monthly payment for principal and interest. The proceeds of the permanent
loan are used to pay off the short-term construction loan, and possibly repay a
portion of your equity. Sometimes, a lender will provide a construction loan
that will convert to a permanent loan upon construction completion. This has
the advantage of reducing your financing risk. There’s always the outside
chance that you may have trouble getting long-term financing once the project
is done. With a loan of this type, that financing is already in place.
Financing terms can be very complicated. Our company never takes on a
loan without thoroughly reviewing the loan documents ourselves, as well as
having the documents reviewed by an attorney who specializes in real estate fi-
nancing. Be sure you understand what you are obligating yourself to.
A Few Final Words
You, the developer, will put yourself on the line for the money to fulfill your
dream, but you won’t see your profit until the project is completed and opera-
tional. While the rewards of a well-thought-out and well-constructed project
are fantastic in the end, it is a long journey, and there is a lot of risk along the
way. The processes I used for building my first home in 1976 for $29,000, and
the communities we have built for more than $30 million are basically the same:
lots of time, research, due diligence, expenses, and sleepless nights.
By the time we identify a site, analyze the market, hire the professionals, ob-
tain financing, and start construction, we have invested huge amounts of time
and money. Every day during the development process a new challenge presents
itself. It is a major commitment and financial risk to take on an apartment de-
velopment, with the prospect of financial reward in the distant future. The de-
velopment process is complicated and frustrating but also exciting and fun. You
cannot anticipate everything, but you can succeed if you approach your project
methodically, get the best advice and help, don’t cut corners, and never give up!
The personal and financial rewards are unsurpassed.
Hang on for a challenging adventure. Watch out for the duck-billed hump-
back pygmy field mice and all the other bumps in this ride. You are either going
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 87
to enjoy developing and building a new community as much as I do, or you will
find that it isn’t your cup of tea. Either way, I wish you much success!
Ross McCallister is a thirty-year industry expert in real estate/develop-
ment and finance. He is a co-partner of MC Companies and oversees in-
vestment analysis, development, construction, financing, business
development, and client relations. He is a licensed real estate broker and
a licensed general contractor. Ross has developed and constructed more
than four thousand apartment units in Arizona and managed condo-
minium conversions in Oregon, Las Vegas, and Arizona valued in excess of $300 million.
Prior to founding MC Companies with Ken McElroy, Ross was president of The McCallister
Company, a real estate syndication firm and property management company. Ross believes
in “giving back” and has served the real estate industry on various boards throughout his
career, including the Office of the Governor’s Arizona Housing Finance Authority Board.
88 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Commercial real estate is very different from residential real estate. Craig Cop-
pola is recognized as one of the best commercial real estate brokers in the
United States. That is why he is my partner in commercial real estate investments,
and we have done extremely well financially.
When Kim and I began our transition from residential to commercial real estate,
the first thing we had to do was let go of a residential real estate investor’s mind-
set. We had to see real estate investing through a different set of eyes. If not for
Craig’s experience, Kim and I might have lost a lot of money paying for our com-
mercial real estate education. Craig is great because he is a tremendous teacher
and takes the time to explain what we fail to see.
As an example, Craig’s education of Kim and me began with our interest in a
beautiful office building in a great location. It was a cute structure, built in the
1980s. The first thing Craig said was that there was not enough parking. He did
not even look at the building. Since the 1980s, zoning laws had been passed requir-
ing more parking spaces. If we wanted to improve the building, we would have to
tear it down completely and rebuild from the ground up to comply with the new
zoning law. The second lesson from Craig on the same building was that “Cute
buildings attract cute businesses.” He went on to say, “Rent to well-run businesses,
not cute people running cute businesses. You’ll have fewer headaches and earn
more money.”
5Craig COPPOLA, CCIM, CRE, SIOR
Master Your Universe:
Get the Lay of the Land
89
90 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Craig is the most well-organized person I know. He has his days planned to the
minute. He is constantly studying and investing in his personal development—his
business—yet time with his family takes the highest priority. Craig is a great family
man and natural teacher, and he is priceless as a real estate partner.
—Robert Kiyosaki
P eople who know me know that when I commit to doing something I gen-
erally jump in with both feet. And that is probably an understatement. It’s
not that I’m foolhardy about it; people would say I’m methodical and possibly
relentless. I don’t make rash decisions, and I don’t give up. That’s the way I ap-
proach my business goals, my personal goals, and my family goals. People would
also say I’m consistent.
One of my passions in life has been baseball. I was an all-state high school
and all-conference college player, and I was even drafted and played profes-
sionally with the Minnesota Twins organization. But after baseball, I knew I
needed something that I could throw myself into 100 percent, something that I
would love just as much and that would help me achieve my life goals.
Like so many people, my story of how I entered the real estate profession is a
classic friend-of-a-friend story. I won’t bore you with the details, but suffice it
to say I did my share of dues paying. I didn’t mind. My mentality then was no
different than it is now and no different than it was playing baseball: Everything
I do makes me stronger, smarter, and faster and gives me the only thing I ever
ask for in life—an unfair advantage.
Yes, I want an unfair advantage and I do what it takes to get it—ethically.
Getting the unfair advantage ethically usually means no shortcuts, lots of home-
work, discipline, and sacrifice. At least that is how it has been for me. When it
pays off, those long days and longer nights of poring over real estate offering
Memorandums, market comparables, and property financial data become dis-
tant memories that are replaced with cash, which flows into my mailbox on a
monthly basis. It’s a beautiful thing.
My career in real estate has afforded me spare time to do other things that I
love; that was part of my plan when I got into this business. I wanted to be able
to spend more time with my family, participate in my kids’ lives, and pursue
other passions in life such as running, Tai Kwon Do, and of course, baseball.
Today my passion for baseball takes the form of coaching a youth club base-
ball team—the Arcadia Rat Pack—and I approached that in much the same way
I’ve approached everything else I’ve set out to do: with a startling amount of
research, analysis, planning, and detail all in preparation for intense action. I’m
not coaching a pro sports team, but regardless, I had batting lineups (based on
who from the opposing team was pitching), training schedules, practice sched-
ules, scouting reports, game strategies, substitution plans, even a plan for who
was going to coach first base. Some of the parents, I’m sure, thought I was going
a little overboard.
But to me “going overboard” was simply preparing the team to face every
challenge in practice so that when those same situations came up in a game,
they weren’t new. I wanted to give those kids the unfair advantage, ethically. In
essence, my role was to put those kids in a position to win.
That included mastering our universe and knowing the lay of the land. What
teams were we going to be up against? What were their strengths and their
weaknesses? How could we exploit those weaknesses and overcome their
strengths? What do we do in a first-and-third situation? What’s our bunt defense?
How do we handle a “run down”? We studied, strategized, and practiced all this
and more. We made it all the way to the state finals and were state runner-ups—
that was victory to us. Sixteen wins and three losses. The team played great
and came away with better and more confident kids. I want the same for you
when it comes to commercial real estate investing. I want you to win! I want
you to be the master of your universe before you even think about investing in
property.
In real estate, mastering your universe takes the form of knowing
intimately your chosen area of city or town, fully understanding and enjoying
your preferred type of real estate investment (also known as “asset class”),
and being tuned in to the real estate cycle.
In real estate, mastering your universe takes the form of knowing intimately
your chosen area of city or town, fully understanding and enjoying your pre-
ferred type of real estate investment (also known as “asset class”), and being
tuned in to the real estate cycle. Once you’ve achieved all this, you are in a great
position to begin considering properties. Here’s your first pitch:
Let’s Take a Ride
Even if you have lived in the same city or town your whole life and feel you
know every road and every building, humor me, and still hop in your car and
take a ride. This won’t be a ride to simply look at buildings; it’s a ride to help you
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 91
look at your town or city with what I like to call “real estate eyes.” Actually look-
ing at the buildings is a minor thing at this point. This drive will help you to un-
derstand the lay of the land—the environment the buildings are sitting in—from
many different perspectives. The drive is about location, location, location.
Start your drive with the goal of trying to understand the overall city from a
real estate investment perspective. Be observant. What do you think is impact-
ing real estate values in one neighborhood or another? Even if you think you
know the area in which you want to invest, it’s still a good idea to understand
what’s going on in other areas of your city or town. Those things will play a
part in the value of the area you like best.
By now it is probably no surprise to you that I live by my schedule. My days,
weeks, months, and years are open to change, but they are highly planned.
Whether you are a heavy scheduler or not, if you really look at your life, you’ll
likely find that we are all creatures of habit. We drive the same way to work and
the same way home, day in and day out. Not only do we miss the opportunities
on that drive, but we never see the changes that are taking place in the other 90
percent of our community. So the first thing I recommend in order to get the
lay of the land and master your universe is to drive a different way to work. If
you normally take the highway, then take the residential streets. If you always
stop at the same Starbucks for coffee, then go to a different coffee shop. Take in
a variety of scenery and people.
Recommendation No. 1: Master your universe by driving a different way
at different times to work, and take in the world from a real estate perspective.
You’ll be surprised by what you see.
Once you think you know an area, travel there at different times of the day.
How about evenings, weekends, and at night? Really take the time to see how
people live in this area, how it is trafficked. You may be surprised. There are
neighborhoods that not only have changed over time, but there are neighbor-
hoods that change with the time of day. I’ve seen parts of town that are “hap-
pening” spots during the week and during lunch, but they are absolute ghost
towns during the dinner hour and at night. If you’re looking for a great building
for a daytime business, this area of town could be the right place. But if you’re
looking for a building for an evening business, look elsewhere. Your goal here
is to look at an area and “get it.” That means you get what it’s about, and you
know what is a fit. Once you “get an area,” you will begin to be able to see the
future. This is a gut response that may be helpful to write down. You’ll have an
TIP
92 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
opportunity later to test how right you are when you talk to the experts who
will eventually be on your team—appraisers, inspectors, attorneys, brokers, and
builders.
Look for “The Path of Growth”
When it comes to understanding the lay of the land, I look for what real estate
pros call “the path of growth” in the market. Even in cities that as a whole are
not growing, there usually are areas that are. How do you recognize the path of
growth when it comes to commercial real estate? Look for the areas where
home builders are buying land, where new homes are being constructed, and
where elementary schools are being planned and built. City governments are a
great resource for this information because they tell you where they are plan-
ning to build new facilities and where infrastructure is going in. You can also
get good insight from the economic development officials in your city offices.
It’s always interesting to see which projects they are the most excited about
and what they see developing down the road.
Recommendation No. 2: Get to know your city officials and staff.
Find out the projects that are underway that they are the most excited about.
The more you talk with them, the more you’ll come to know where the path
of growth really is.
City officials often can be very excited about urban revitalization projects
that are underway and often help fund projects that jump-start the process.
How exciting it is to think about being part of the solution to violence, crime,
and urban blight! But here’s my caution: These kinds of projects take time, lots
of time. Not only is there the obvious planning, zoning, designing, and entitle-
ment process that must happen; sometimes votes are involved. Then there is
the intangible consumer acceptance variable that can take years. In my home-
town of Phoenix, there were more than $800 million of revitalization projects
built before I considered this area for investment, and the elapsed time to re-
solve them took more than twelve years. So stay cautious for a very long time
because even neighborhoods marked for revitalization may remain in decline
for years.
I should point out that some real estate investors make it their entire business
to seek out declining neighborhoods. People who specialize in urban revital-
ization are just one example. That’s not my area of interest or expertise, so for
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 93
my specialty—commercial office space—I stay clear when I see a lot of graffiti
or closed businesses. That seems obvious, but you’ll be surprised how a quaint
historic home that may have been recently rezoned commercial in a troubled
neighborhood can still be compelling to emotional investors. These buyers can
easily talk themselves into a bad decision by thinking that purchasing this build-
ing will be good for the neighborhood, or by telling themselves they will live
with the location because the building is so perfect. None of these arguments is
good enough. Remember, it’s location first, no matter how difficult the dwelling
is to pass up.
It’s Tough to Grow Your Way
out of a Downhill Slide
The reason I’m such a stickler on this point is that it’s really tough to grow your
way out of a downhill slide. There’s a difference between a declining area and
an area that is going to be revitalized. When you get the feel that a neighborhood
is going downhill, stay away. If it’s on the upswing and that historic building is
right in the center of it, don’t let your preconceived beliefs about the neighbor-
hood hold you back. There may be an opportunity. Understand they call it real
estate for a reason. You’re looking at the real estate first. That’s the key under-
lying truth to all of this. The building is second.
To me an absolute must is to fully understand where the market is going, not
just where it is today. It’s all about feel and not getting in too early. What I mean
by that is unlike some businesses where speed is everything, there is no need to
be on the bleeding edge in real estate. You don’t have to be first. You don’t want
to be first; leave that to the biggest players who can afford the risk. There’s
plenty of opportunity and money to be made by being second, third, and even
twenty-third. Leave the bleeding edge to the big boys. In fact, if you’re a small
investor who is starting out, never be first.
Recommendation No. 3: Do the homework it takes to fully understand
where the market is going, not just where it is at this moment in time. You’re
investing for the future, so see the future as best you can.
Even though time flies, when it comes to real estate, I’ve been surprised by
how long it takes the future to actually arrive. And if you’re in a downhill slide,
the future can’t happen quick enough, believe me. You may find out that your
grand vision for the property isn’t two years away; it’s actually twenty. This has
TIP
94 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
happened to many real estate investors. The town of Fountain Hills, Arizona,
was started by a real estate speculator in the 1970s. He built the world’s highest
fountain, which is powered by jet engines and shoots a huge plume of water
560 feet into the air. His goal was to attract curious people to the new commu-
nity that at the time was out in the middle of nowhere. People came and mar-
veled at the fountain, but not enough bought real estate. It took decades for the
real estate in Fountain Hills to really take off. Today it is a thriving community,
but it took almost thirty years for that to happen.
Is your view of the future too far ahead of the curve? My rule is to take my
time and be patient. There’s no need for excessive urgency at this point in the
process. If there’s room for one person to make money in an area, then there’s
room for more. In fact, I’ve found there are very few properties that are so spe-
cial that if you miss them, you miss the deal of the century or even the decade.
While those properties do exist, their owners know it and they typically over-
price the properties anyway, negating the value of the deal. A good example is
the Esplanade and Biltmore Fashion Park, both within the same city block in
the highly sought after Camelback Corridor in Phoenix. Those properties are
the types that are bought by huge institutions who want trophy properties
where the look and the location are more critical than the solidity of the real
estate and the return. For example, General Electric bought Hayden Ferry Lake-
side in a prestigious area of Tempe, Arizona. MetLife bought the Esplanade in
Phoenix. These are called core plus properties and are named such because
they create a portfolio of foundation projects that entice other investors who
are looking for glamorous investments.
Recommendation No. 4: Real estate investing is about patience. There
is no need to rush into an investment in any market.
Keep Your Real Estate Eyes Open
As you look at neighborhoods, don’t overlook the places that you think might
be too expensive, too cheap, or that used to be blighted. Neighborhoods change.
I know one investor who has made a ton of money improving the looks and
performance of less-than-stellar buildings and increasing the property values.
It takes a big commitment to do that, but she’s doing it. Understand, too, that
there are slum lords out there who have made big bucks owning very shabby
properties. That’s not something I encourage; part of what we can do as in-
vestors is create better spaces for all. But with that said, it’s a free country.
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 95
Everyone always asks this: What are the warning signs of a declining neigh-
borhood? That’s easy, and if you go with your feelings, you’ll know them in-
stinctively. True story, I was driving one morning, checking out a few
neighborhoods I hadn’t been through in a while and drove right by a car on
blocks with the tires missing. That’s the classic bad sign, and there it was in all
its glory. Other signs are multiple cars parked in the street at night and a tenant
mix in a building that looks fly-by-night or that are in shady businesses. Finally,
take a look at the general upkeep. If the properties are unkempt, that’s not good
either. You may even want to take a look at the police reports to see how much
crime happens in the area.
The bottom line is you can modify your building, but you alone can’t modify
the neighborhood your building sits in. And about that quaint historic building
in a seedy part of town: Sure it would make great offices for a trendy design
studio, but if your employees are too afraid to work there or stay after hours,
how wise was your decision? Open your eyes and think through what you’re
seeing, and listen to your gut. Write down what you feel—yes, what you feel—
about every neighborhood. On the next page is a form that will not only help
you know important considerations, but also will give you a place to record your
impressions about the area.
Recommendation No. 5: Look for the signs of a declining neighborhood,
and don’t be in denial about them. Unless you want to specialize in renewal
projects, those signs matter.
Let’s Talk Buildings . . . Sort of
As I mentioned, the actual buildings themselves are practically the last things I
look at when I’m getting familiar with a city and its neighborhoods. And even
when it comes to a building, I don’t initially see the vertical structure; I see the
property it’s sitting on. Are there enough parking spaces? Is it easy to get into
and out of? In other words, does the property have good access? And looking at
the building and the site it is sitting on, does it feel right? And can visitors find
the location without getting lost?
From there I take a closer look at who is occupying the building. What are
the tenants like? Are they quality, established companies or a little on the flakey
side? A tenant doesn’t have to be The Home Depot or Taco Bell to be acceptable.
A local plumbing outfit that’s been in a building for ten years is actually a good
tenant—I have one like that—particularly when compared to let’s say a start-up
TIP
96 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 97
Drive Guide – The Neighborhood Environment
Below are the things you need to look for as you drive neighborhoods and look at environments.
(Rating scale: 1 is poor, 2 is fair, 3 is average, 4 is good, 5 is very good.) Add comments to right.
Neighborhood Environment: __________________________________________________ (list area)
Border: N__________________ / S__________________ / E__________________ / W________________
(comments)
Overall upkeep 1 2 3 4 5 _______________
General condition of buildings 1 2 3 4 5 _______________
Quality/condition of cars in area 1 2 3 4 5 _______________
Quality of businesses in area 1 2 3 4 5 _______________
Traffic patterns 1 2 3 4 5 ______________
Area landscape 1 2 3 4 5 _______________
Overall visual interest 1 2 3 4 5 _______________
Perceived prestige 1 2 3 4 5 _______________
Would I buy here? Yes No
If yes, what product type? _________________________________________________________________
On what street(s) would I own? ____________________________________________________________
Your Feelings and Impressions
High points? Morning Noon Night
____________________ ____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________ ____________________
Low points? Morning Noon Night
____________________ ____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________ ____________________
Future Outlook
In 5 years: _______________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
In 10 years: ______________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
Other impressions: ______________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
Questions I need answered: _______________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
FIGURE 5.1
technology company that no one has ever heard of with millions in venture
capital money and a burn rate of a million dollars per month with one customer
and no profits. I also consider the tenant’s position within their industry, the
level of competition, and where the industry is going.
Recommendation No. 6: Consider the building last and look at the
location and property it’s on first.
One afternoon, a friend called me from her car as she was traveling in a small
town some distance from her home. She said, “Hey Craig, I’m looking at a great
building here that’s all set up for a call center. What do you think?” For me the
answer was easy. Call centers are declining in the United States with most com-
panies shipping their operations overseas. I replied, “Unless you’re in India
right now, I’d pass.” Much of this is really common sense and having some
knowledge of where the trends are, not just in real estate, but also in the areas
of business and life that affect real estate.
The tracking form on the next page is a tool you can use to record your first-
glance view and impressions of a property. It’s also a great idea to bring along a
digital camera so you can take photos of buildings and attach them to the Driv-
ing Guide records. Pay special attention to these items and be sure to record
your overall impressions as well.
Commercial Asset Class Options
One of the most important decisions you as a real estate investor will have to
make is in which area of the business you want to specialize. If reading this
book tells you anything, it should tell you that there are a lot of ways to make
and lose money in the world of real estate. Even within the commercial real es-
tate sector, there are a number of different asset class options. You’ll soon dis-
cover that they are each quite specialized with plenty of their own nuances and
requirements. I believe it’s important to see the commercial real estate sector
in its entirety so that you get an accurate picture of how it is all interconnected
because, even though the different asset classes are unique, they all do work to-
gether to create an environment within an area of a city or town. Here are the
asset classes complete with descriptions and the risks and the rewards.
Recommendation No. 7: No one can possibly be an expert in every
commercial asset class. Choose the one you think you’ll enjoy most and
specialize in it.
TIP
TIP
98 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 99
Drive Guide – The Building
Below are the things you need to look for as you drive and look at buildings. You’ll want one form
for each building you view. (Rating scale: 1 is poor, 2 is fair, 3 is average, 4 is good, 5 is very good.)
Building Name: __________________________________________________________________________
Building Address: ________________________________________________________________________
(comments)
Location within area 1 2 3 4 5 ____________________
Curb appeal 1 2 3 4 5 ____________________
General condition 1 2 3 4 5 ____________________
Parking 1 2 3 4 5 ____________________
Lighting 1 2 3 4 5 ____________________
Access/entrance and exit 1 2 3 4 5 ____________________
Tenants 1 2 3 4 5 ____________________
Ease of finding 1 2 3 4 5 ____________________
Landscaping 1 2 3 4 5 ____________________
Fits with your needs/wants 1 2 3 4 5 ____________________
Your Feelings and Impressions
High points? Morning Noon Night
____________________ ____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________ ____________________
Low points? Morning Noon Night
____________________ ____________________ ____________________
____________________ ____________________ ____________________
Future Outlook
In 5 years: ______________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
In 10 years: _____________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
Other impressions: ______________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
FIGURE 5.2
Multifamily
The multifamily asset class includes everything from small duplex apartment
buildings to entire apartment complexes with eight hundred units or more. The
biggest risk in this asset class is oversupply because when people have lots of
choices, rents can fall, affecting your property’s operating performance and
cash flow. Another risk with multifamily is that when interest rates are low,
more people can afford to buy homes, so they don’t have to rent. That leaves
more apartment units vacant and competing for fewer residents. But on the
plus side, when lending gets tighter and it becomes harder to qualify for a home
mortgage, renting becomes the only option, and the demand for apartment
homes increases. Investors have made a lot of money in this area of commercial
real estate by buying right and managing efficiently. Like all commercial real
estate, the value of a multifamily property increases based on increased operat-
ing performance. In other words, buying a property and then managing it and
filling up the vacant space better than the previous owner can create an auto-
matic bump in value.
Retail
Retail commercial space is something you know probably quite well: shopping
centers, strip centers, malls, and stand-alone retailers. The benefit with retail
property is that construction costs are high—often tens to hundreds of millions
of dollars—making for a high barrier to entry by competitors. This keeps de-
mand usually ahead of supply. As an investor, that’s generally a good position
to be in. But it’s not all blue sky. Economic factors such as reports of inflation,
recession, and declining consumer spending trends can trigger retailers to go
out of business, and as a building owner you could lose a retail tenant. Compe-
tition can also turn a favored retail center into one that is second class. That’s
what I mean about knowing the lay of the land and seeing the future. You want
to know what is coming, not just what is.
Commercial Office
Office buildings and office condos are one of the largest real estate asset classes.
Just look around. We all work somewhere, and offices house many of us daily
from eight-to-five. Offices come in many shapes and sizes, so there is diversity
and easy entry for new investors. Some offices are former residential buildings
converted to office space. Others are conventional office buildings of all shapes
and sizes. The benefit of commercial office space is that there is likely something
in your town that will fit your budget whether you are a first-time or a seasoned
100 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
investor and give you plenty of room to grow as you increase your wealth and
your level of investment.
Industrial
Just like commercial office buildings, industrial spaces tend to have longer
leases and lots of options when it comes to investing. There are giant ware-
houses with upward of five hundred thousand square feet and smaller mixed-
use spaces in the neighborhood of three thousand square feet, along with
everything in between. Because of the many options available, industrial space
is a classic first-time-investor property. One reason for industrial’s popularity
with first-time investors is that many have their own businesses and need this
kind of space.
Health Care
This asset class in commercial real estate includes not just hospitals, but also
nursing homes, medical buildings, and assisted living facilities. The benefit of
this class is that recessions and economic downturns don’t really affect it much.
But it is prone to the ups and downs of the tenant. Medical practices are small
businesses. Hospitals are big businesses. And business can fluctuate. Plus, the
medical profession is one that is in a state of flux, and it will be so for many
years to come. Through my experience in this area I know that not only is it
important to have the right tenants in your space, but it’s important to have the
right mix of tenants in your space—the right practices and the right practition-
ers. Assisted living facilities, on the other hand, rely heavily on good manage-
ment. Having a reputable management company that specializes in these kinds
of communities is a must.
Self Storage
Self storage spaces are those mini-warehouse consumer and commercial facil-
ities that you most likely have seen in your town. You may even have some of
your things stored in one of them. They are seemingly recession resistant, and
that is a big advantage for you as an investor. Generally, the management is rel-
atively easy. Believe it or not, corporations are actually the biggest users of stor-
age facilities, and every year they pay billions to store excess files, records, and
general stuff. The downside is that building self storage facilities is a low-cost
proposition. That means it’s easy for competitors to break into the market,
charge a lower price, and erode your margins. When it comes to self storage, I
always make sure there are lots of rooftops nearby as well.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 101
Hospitality
This asset class includes hotels, motels, casinos, bed and breakfasts, resorts,
and vacation rentals. And like assisted care facilities, management is impor-
tant. In general, it is the asset class most closely connected with the health of
the economy. In periods of economic decline, travels for business or pleasure
are early casualties of cost-cutting and penny-pinching. That affects the num-
ber of room nights booked, which means per-night room rates can fall as prop-
erties vie for fewer customers. This, in turn, erodes income and profitability,
but in markets with a balanced supply-and-demand ratio, hospitality can be
very lucrative.
Within each of these asset classes are subcategories. All these options may
at first seem overwhelming, but in reality it’s this diversity that makes com-
mercial real estate so lucrative and why smart investors specialize. It’s this spe-
cialization that enables us to have an advantage over other types of investments
and over other types of investors who are trying to do it all.
The ABCs of Commercial Space
Just as you need to know the various asset classes and some of the nuances of
each, it’s a good idea to know the four classes of commercial space that refer to
the quality of the property. Too often I have seen novice investors duped into
believing that an office building is one class, when it is really a lesser class.
Class matters because the better the class of building, the higher the rent per
square foot. Here are the official class guidelines:
Class A+. Landmark quality, high-rise buildings with a central business dis-
trict location. These are the best of the Class A buildings.
Class A. Buildings that are one hundred square feet or larger with at least
five floors. The construction of these buildings is concrete and steel, and they
were built after 1980. Buildings include business/support amenities such as
cafés and banks, and they have strong identifiable locations and accesses.
Class B. Renovated buildings in good locations or newer buildings that are
smaller in size. These can be wood frame construction in nonprime locations.
Most first-time investors invest here.
Class C. Older buildings that are not renovated. They can be of any size, and
are in average to fair condition.
Keep these qualifications in mind as you look at properties. They will help
you know what you are looking at, and they will also help you recognize false
advertising when you see it.
102 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 103
The Real Estate Cycle Revealed
Although you now know there are more kinds of commercial property than
you could have imagined, you may still be surprised to learn that their perform-
ance over time is cyclical in whole and in part. What I mean by that is that each
asset class runs through a cycle. And each asset class’s cycle either flows before,
flows with, or flows after another asset class’s cycle.
For example, you’ll find that growth in residential housing will fuel a similar
but slightly lagging rise in retail. This pattern makes sense when you consider
that new homeowners will want shopping centers, grocery stores, and other
conveniences near where they live. The surge in retail then drives growth in
the industrial and distribution sectors, so that means warehouse and mixed-
use property development grows. Home development also drives some growth
in commercial office space, but again commercial lags behind. That’s why when
housing development slows, it takes a few years for commercial to slow down,
too. You’ve probably noticed that. When the news is reporting real estate de-
clines, new commercial projects are still getting underway. Now you know why.
Real estate is about cycles and the inevitability of them. Once you know that
and know how to pay attention to the cycles, you’ll know the lay of the land in
this regard, too, and you’ll be in a position to make the best of the cycle by mak-
ing the best decisions along the way.
Recommendation No. 8: Understand the real estate cycle and watch for
the indicators, and you will seldom be surprised.
Cycles are important, but in reality if you buy right, your real estate will do
well, regardless of where in the cycle you bought. But if you are just starting
out, buying right may not be as intuitive to you, so understanding the real estate
cycle becomes golden knowledge. The following diagram shows the typical
commercial real estate cycle and how it affects new construction and vacancy.
Let’s walk through each quadrant. In Phase 1, the lower left quadrant, the
market is in recovery phase. There is declining vacancy and no new construction.
You know the market is in this phase when there is some growth in the market
indicated by properties being rented and properties being sold. This uptrend
can, and often does, last a long time, years in many cases. That’s why I never
feel like I need to rush into an investment. I also don’t like surprises, so I gener-
ally let the bigger guys make the first leaps during this phase. Then I make my
moves with solid knowledge that we are solidly in Phase one—the buying phase.
TIP
Recommendation No. 9: Phase 1 in the real estate cycle is the time to
buy, and Phase 2 and 3 is the time to sell.
As you’ll see in a minute when we talk about Phase 3 and Phase 4, declining
markets aren’t the time to take vacations. Doing lots of homework during those
times will make you smarter and at the ready during a Phase 1 market when it
is time to buy. When the other guys who bought poorly, or bought in the wrong
phase of the market, have thrown in the towel, that’s when I buy.
During Phase 2, you see the occupancy rates move below the Long Term Occu-
pancy (LT Occupancy line on the diagram) for your market. (Long Term Oc-
cupancy means that owners typically need at least a minimum of five years of
term remaining.) Every market is different, but in most cases, vacancy is very
healthy when it is below 10 percent. Understand that new construction tends
to start when vacancy rates drop below 10 and 15 percent, so during this phase
new properties begin to be developed. Again, this phase of the cycle does not
last days, weeks, or months. It tends to last a few years, so there is no hurry
here. If and when I buy during this phase, I really make sure the numbers work
and that the property meets my qualifications. There’s no way of knowing ex-
actly where the top of the market is or how long it will last, so caution is the
rule. If you’re going to sell, Phase 2 is when you do it.
Recommendation No. 10: Phase 3 and Phase 4 are not the times
to buy. They are the times to research and target properties to buy when
Phase 1 kicks in.
TIP
TIP
104 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Market Cycle Quadrants
Phase II - Expansion Phase III - Hypersupply
Phase I - Recovery Phase IV - Recession
Declining Vacancy
New Construction
Increasing Vacancy
New Construction
Declining Vacancy
No New Construction
Increasing Vacancy
More Completions
LT Occupancy
FIGURE 5.3 Market Cycle Quadrants
Used with permission by Glenn R. Mueller, Ph.D.
In Phase 3, the market is in obvious decline. The guessing game, however, is
how far the market will fall and how long it will take. If you bought in Phase 1,
you may have bought yourself some strength. But when you are still seeing new
construction underway and occupancy rates increasing above the LT Occu-
pancy for your market, recognize the signs that you are in Phase 3. This is known
as “hyper supply.” Obviously, I never buy during this phase no matter how badly
I want a building. I am simply not willing to ride the wave to the bottom, not
knowing how far down bottom is. What’s the point when I know that there
will be plenty of time for deals that make sense in Phase 1? In fact, I’ll be buying
at bargain prices the properties others foolishly bought in Phase 3! You’ll hear
people say that there are buying opportunities in every phase. That is true. But
it just depends on how strong your constitution is and how deep your pockets
are.
Finally, Phase 4 signals market bottom. But there’s good news in Phase 4,
too. The darker it gets in Phase 4, the better the buying opportunities will be in
Phase 1. So if you’re on the buying side, relish Phase 4, and take the time to look
at properties. Look a lot, but don’t buy a thing. There’s no way of knowing the
bottom until it makes the turn upward. You’ll know you’re in Phase 4 when va-
cancy hits its high well above the LT Occupancy and buildings are no longer
under construction. The cranes and bulldozers will be replaced by completed
buildings sitting vacant. At this time, I do a lot of research so that when Phase 1
kicks in I have pinpointed some ripe buying opportunities. I have lined up in-
vestors and financing and spoken to lots of people and told them that when the
turnaround happens, I’ll give them a call.
While it is helpful to know that real estate is cyclical and in all cases inter-
connected by asset class, knowing where you are in a market cycle and predict-
ing where it is going is key. Savvy investors can make money anywhere in the
cycle, but it takes great skill and experience to make money on the right side of
the line.
Further, understand that all real estate follows this pattern and that some
asset classes will follow the curve earlier or later than others. For instance, res-
idential real estate is always the first to decline and the first to rebound. Multi-
family follows a little later, and retail and commercial after that. Commercial/
industrial is usually the last asset class to emerge from a down market; however
it is usually the last to enter it. The more familiar you get with watching the
real estate cycles, the better you will get at knowing where you are in them.
Commercial real estate, for me, gives me plenty of warning to buy, sell, and
hold.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 105
The Last Word on Mastery
Well, now you know how critical the lay of the land in terms of neighborhood,
asset class, and the real estate cycle is to the success of your real estate invest-
ment career. But just like in baseball, there’s a huge gap between knowing how
to hit a home run and hitting a home run. That gap, of course, is technique,
practice, and unfortunately, failure. Becoming master of your real estate uni-
verse will take all of those, too. It did for me. I’ve lived in Phoenix for more
than twenty years, and I still drive around the market with real estate eyes.
Things are always changing, and I need to keep up with those changes. I develop
new systems to make me more efficient as I analyze properties and deals. And
I’m not ashamed to say on my first deal I lost $15,000 and didn’t even end up
with the property! It never closed. These kinds of things happen to everyone,
and they are what separate the serious investors from the novices.
The same goes for baseball. Every time the Arcadia Rat Pack stepped out on
the diamond, they expected to win, but they also knew that losing was a possi-
bility. Of course we did everything in our power to increase the odds of winning,
but on those occasions when we didn’t come out on top, our team learned what
didn’t work, what we had to do better next time, and what subtleties we missed.
We didn’t make the same mistakes twice, and that’s the benefit of losing: the
lessons.
Yes, knowledge is just part of the story. But action is the most critical part.
All the information in this chapter and within this book as a whole is only as
good as your willingness to take action on it. So make a pact with yourself to
become master of your real estate universe. Step up to the plate. That first swing
is yours to take.
Ways to Learn More
CCIM Institute (Certified Commercial Investment Manager)
SIOR (Society of Industrial and Office Realtors)
CRE (Councilors of Real Estate)
NAIOP (National Association of Industrial and Office Properties)
ULI (Urban Land Institute)
LoopNet.com—a great place to learn about your market and research properties
InvestorWords.com—excellent online glossary of terms
106 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 107
A forthcoming Rich Dad Advisor book: How to Win in Commercial Real Estate:
Your Guide to Finding, Evaluating, and Purchasing Your First Commercial Prop-
erty in 9 Weeks or Less, by Craig Coppola
One of the premier commercial real estate brokers in the United States,
Craig Coppola has been awarded the Arizona Office Broker of the Year
six times in the past thirteen years by the National Association of Indus-
trial and Office Properties. He has completed more than twenty-five hun-
dred lease and sale transactions over the past twenty-three years, totaling
a value in excess of $2.5 billion. As founding principal of Lee & Associates
Arizona, Craig has earned the top three designations in the real estate industry: CCIM, CRE,
and SIOR. Only thirty-five people worldwide hold all three.
Garrett and I share a common love: the love of the game of rugby. Although we
do not remember each other, we played against each other years ago on op-
posing teams at the Monterrey Rugby Festival. He played for the Hastings Rugby
Club of San Francisco, and I played for the Navy/Marine Corps Flight School
team from Pensacola, Florida. Unfortunately, we were not the better team, but it
was a great game.
In 2003, Garrett and I traveled to Sydney, Australia, to watch the Rugby World
Cup. It is in our humble opinion that we witnessed the greatest game of rugby
ever played. It was the final match between England and Australia. For as long as
I live, I will always remember that game and feel honored to have been a spectator
in the stands as we watched England beat Australia in overtime by a score of
twenty to seventeen.
Besides being a rugby player, Garrett is an attorney. He is a very important at-
torney. He specializes in asset protection, which is a vital area of law because in
today’s world there are more attorneys who want to steal your assets than there
are who want to protect them. One of the reasons why Kim and I can sleep soundly
at night is because Garrett is an expert at making sure our assets are protected.
This does not mean we are totally protected. This means Garrett has built legal
firewalls around different assets. It means we might lose one or two properties,
but we will not lose everything.
Garrett SUTTON
108
6
10 Rules for Real Estate
Asset Protection
In today’s litigious world, having a Garrett Sutton on your side is vital for any-
one who wants to grow rich and get a good night’s sleep, too.
—Robert Kiyosaki
A s a Rich Dad’s Advisor, one of the questions I am most frequently asked is:
“How can I protect my real estate?”
In answering this key question, a pattern of repetitive follow-up queries al-
ways ensues such that after several years I have been able to distill all of the is-
sues and concerns into what I call the “10 Rules for Protecting Your Real Estate.”
By knowing, following, and implementing these ten rules, you will not only
properly protect your assets, but you will also avoid the many pitfalls placed in
your path by the overpriced asset protection “gurus” and service providers out
there who are more interested in your money than your situation. You will have
the confidence to say “No” to these people because you will know more than
they do.
Your important and easily acquired education lies ahead. Let’s begin.
Rule No. 1: Insurance Is Never a Complete
Asset Protection Strategy
Or: Never let a commissioned salesperson tell you how to protect your assets.
At Rich Dad events around the country I am always confronted by the person
who asserts that his insurance agent has assured him that asset protection is a
hoax and that all that is needed is a good insurance policy. I have to laugh be-
cause there are so many instances of insurance companies failing to cover real
estate investors and others on their coverage policies, that there is a whole area
of law named after the situation. It is called “Bad Faith Litigation,” as in the
bad faith that occurs when insurance companies say they will cover you, collect
your premiums, and then, heaven forbid, a claim arises and they find reasons
not to cover you.
Never forget that insurance companies have an economic incentive not to
cover you. As is clearly obvious, the less they pay out in claims, the more money
they make. Also never forget that insurance agents receive a commission on all
the policies they sell. So when an insurance agent says that all you need is insur-
ance instead of asset protection, please remember where his incentive lies. It is
also important to acknowledge that insurance agents are not licensed to give
legal advice. You would have to question the motives of one who would do so.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 109
Given my healthy skepticism of the insurance industry, you would think that
I would advocate the exclusive use of asset protection entities without the use
of any insurance at all.
Insurance is the first line of defense when protecting assets. The proper
use of asset protection strategies is this second line of defense.
But to the contrary, I believe that insurance is the first line of defense when
protecting assets. Many insurance companies are forthright in their dealings
and will honor their coverage commitments. Others, with the help of a legal
nudge, will do the right thing. So I always advocate the reasonable use of insur-
ance as a protection strategy. However, because we know that a certain per-
centage of insurance companies will use exclusions and find reasons not to
cover you, you most certainly need another defense mechanism. The proper
use of asset protection strategies is this second line of defense. As we will learn
in this section, asset protection is not difficult or expensive, but it is required if
you are to succeed at building real estate wealth.
TIP
110 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: The Plight of “Paul”
Aclient of mine, we’ll call Paul, initially believed in the strident assertions of his
“insurance professional.” Instead of combining insurance with entities for his
Aspen, Colorado, fourplex, he obtained only an insurance policy on the mountain
property. He held title to the fourplex in his individual name.
Despite the 100 percent insurance protection guarantees of his agent, the policy
was very clear that the company would not cover any claims related to an avalanche.
Sure enough, Paul’s fourplex was greatly damaged in a swift and freakish ava-
lanche. The insurance company quite correctly refused to cover the claim. Its policy
expressly excluded avalanche damage.
Paul was furious at his agent who, besides assuring that the pricey policy covered
everything and that no other protection was needed, had never pointed out the
very clear policy exclusions. By relying on his agent and not taking any other pro-
tective steps, all of Paul’s assets were exposed to the avalanche claim.
Paul’s problem was completely avoidable. If he had relied on a team of advisors,
including an asset protection attorney, the situation where a highly commissioned
salesperson got away with giving legal advice would never have occurred.
Now that we know that insurance alone will not completely protect us, let’s
review further ways to not protect your real estate before we get to the promised
land of beneficial strategies in later rules.
Rule No. 2: The Two Most Common Ways of
Taking Title to Your Real Estate Do Not
Provide Asset Protection
Or: Why to avoid joint tenancies and tenants in common.
It is indeed ironic that the two most common and popular methods of taking ti-
tle to your real estate provide you with the least protection. Joint tenancy is
one of the most popular forms of holding title because it provides for a right of
survivorship. This works such that if one party dies the other joint tenant be-
comes the sole owner by operation of law, meaning it happens automatically.
Joint tenancy is popular with husband and wife couples. If the husband, for ex-
ample, passes away first, then the wife has complete control of the property
without having to go to court or file new deeds.
The problem for real estate investors is twofold. First, joint tenancies offer
no asset protection. Suppose Peter, Paul, and Coco own a sixplex as joint tenants.
If Paul gets sued, his creditor can reach Paul’s joint tenancy interest. Peter and
Coco now have a new partner in the sixplex, most likely someone, who after
suing their friend and barging their way in, they don’t like right off the bat. As
well, this new partner can bring a partition lawsuit to force a sale of the property.
It can get expensive in legal fees and messy in court.
Secondly, the right of survivorship feature that makes joint tenancies easy
and attractive to married couples is the same feature that makes them so scary
and abhorrent to investors. Let’s take another look at the joint tenancy that
holds Peter, Paul, and Coco’s sixplex. Suppose Coco were to die in a fashion in-
dustry disaster. Her interest in the sixplex is automatically terminated. She
can’t pass her interest on to her heirs because Peter and Paul, by operation of
law, are now the two remaining joint tenants on title.
Savvy investors will not invest with you if you propose taking title as joint
tenants. The good ones know that you should never put yourself in a position
where someone will benefit from your demise. That’s what you are doing with
joint tenancies. I will withhold comment on the state of marriage today and
why so many knowledgeable spouses continue to use joint tenancies. But for
investors it is not the right choice.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 111
Savvy investors will not invest with you if you propose taking title
as joint tenants.
Similarly, but with one exception, taking title as tenants in common is not
the best course, either. Again, there is no asset protection. In our example, if
Peter gets sued, Paul and Coco can find themselves with a new and unwanted
partner. Once again, the partner can bring a partition suit to force a sale of the
property. As well, if there is a lawsuit involving the property (i.e., a tenant sues
over a defective water heater) the individual tenants in common (or individual
joint tenants, for that matter) can be held personally responsible. All of their
personal assets can be exposed to such a claim. Holding title to any property as
individual tenants in common does not make good sense in our very litigious
world. In fact, it can make you more of a target.
The one exception for using tenants in common to hold title is when investors
take their interest not as exposed individuals but with protected entities. In a
TiC situation (“TiC” stands for tenants in common) investors come together
from 1031 exchanges or with investment money to buy a large property. The
large property is held as a tenancy in common with all the various investors
holding their specific TiC interest through a protective entity such as a LLC
(limited liability company).
A chart helps to illustrate:
While I may have let the cat out of the bag (that LLCs are good entities for
real estate), it is my belief that most of you may have already known this. Still,
there are a few more rules involving what not to use before we get to positive
asset protection territory.
TIP
112 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
The Difference Between Individual Tenants in Common
and Tenants in Common (TiC)
John,
as individual Jane,
as individual John’s
LLC Jane’s
LLC
Tenants in Common
4 Plex
TiC
4 Plex
vs.
Outside assets protected from all claimsAll assets personally exposed to all claims
FIGURE 6.1
Rule No. 3: Never Hold Real Estate
in a C Corporation
Or: Fire the professional who even suggests such a thing.
One of the cardinal sins of real estate asset protection is to take title in the name
of a C corporation. While there are certainly advantages to using a C corporation
in business (which are discussed in my Rich Dad’s Advisor book Own Your Own
Corporation) there is a huge disadvantage to using a C corporation for real es-
tate, which can be expressed in one word: taxes.
As you probably know, C corporations face a double tax. You pay taxes once
at the company level and then again when dividends are distributed to share-
holders. With an S corporation, LLC, or LP you pay tax only once at the com-
pany level. A chart graphically illustrates the difference between double
taxation and flow-through taxation.
So what happens when you have a capital gain on the sale of real estate held
by a C corporation? You pay a lot more in taxes.
Consider the situation in which a $500,000 long-term capital gain is realized
on the sale of real estate held for longer than one year.
As the chart on p. 114 indicates, you will pay $144,500 more in federal taxes
by using a C corporation instead of an LLC. Does Uncle Sam want you to use a
C corporation? Of course. Will any investors join your deal if you propose using
a C corporation? Of course not. They’ll know you don’t know what you are do-
ing. Avoid the professional who advises you to use a C corporation to hold any
interest in real estate. They just don’t know what they are doing—to your later
detriment.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 113
No Entity Tax
Flow-Through ProfitsAfter Tax Profits
Corporate Tax
Taxes Paid Once
Taxes Paid Twice Taxes Paid OnceDividends to
Shareholders
Dividends to
Members
$
C
Corporation
LLC, LP, or Sub S
Corporation
$
FIGURE 6.2
114 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Avoid the professional who advises you to use a C corporation to hold
any interest in real estate.
We frequently have clients discuss how some asset protection “guru” or other
promoter advised them to set up their structure as follows:
The rationale is that the two pieces of rental property are owned by the LLCs
and each LLC is in turn owned by a C corporation. The gurus will state that all
kinds of deductions can be taken with a C corporation. The problem is that, as
flow-through entities, the profits flow from the LLCs to a double tax C corpo-
ration. You are still in a bad tax position.
If you are intent on using a C corporation in your entity mix (and please be
cautious of promoters who overly tout the supposed glorious benefits of the C
corporation) a better scenario is the following:
TIP
LLC
4 plex
LLC
Duplex
C Corporation
FIGURE 6.4
C Corporation
$500,000 Gain
−170,000 Less 34% corporate tax (35% for larger corporations)
$330,000
− 49,500 Less 15% tax to shareholder on distributions
$280,500 Amount after tax
LLC
$500,000 Gain
− 75,000 Less 15% capital gain tax
$425,000 Amount after tax
FIGURE 6.3
In the structure above, the title-holding LLCs are held by an asset protecting
Wyoming or Nevada LLC, thus providing flow-through taxation throughout
the structure. For those desiring the write-offs of a C corporation, a manage-
ment C corporation is used. Each title-holding LLC pays a management fee to
the corporation so their benefits are obtained. But there is no ownership of real
estate through the C corporation, thus avoiding the double taxation of profits
we had in the first instance.
Please also beware of promoters who would have you set up more entities
than you need. The management corporation may provide some benefits in
later years when there is plenty of cash flow. But at the start, do you really need
one? Probably not. So be very cautious of those promoters who want what is in
their best interest and not yours.
Rule No. 4: Offshore Strategies Do Not
Work for Onshore Real Estate
Or: What have you been smoking?
As you have probably noticed, throughout this chapter and in my other writings
I have found the need to warn against the slick and salesy gurus and promoters
with their incredible claims and come-ons. Certainly some of the most outra-
geous claims come from the offshore promoters who offer tax savings and ab-
solute privacy. Of course, they never mention the existing United States rules
and regulations that do, in fact, run contrary to their claims. In most cases,
these people actually live on small Caribbean Islands or in European principal-
ities beyond the reach of U.S. authorities. They can say what they want.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 115
LLC
4 plex
LLC
Duplex
WY or NV LLC
Management
C Corporation
FIGURE 6.5
But as a U.S. citizen, can you afford to listen to those who intentionally mis-
represent U.S. laws? Or course not.
To further your caution, let’s review what can happen when offshore asset
protection is used in attempt to protect U.S. real estate.
Real Life Story: John’s Bad Day
John was a doctor in California. He had worked hard and paid his taxes. He owned
a twenty-unit Roseville apartment building free and clear and a significant bro-
kerage account. He felt as if he were doing well, but the combination of the mal-
practice and real estate litigation explosion and the ravenous demands of both the
IRS and California’s notorious state tax collector—the Franchise Tax Board—had
led John down the path of considering offshore options.
A promoter from the Caribbean Island of Nevis held a seminar for doctors and
dentists in John’s hometown. The self-styled asset protection man with glowing
testimonials and advanced degrees from schools John had not heard of, laid out a
comprehensive and seamless case for using Nevis structures to protect assets.
The promoter boldly claimed that by using offshore trusts John could obtain com-
plete privacy and incredible tax savings. His strategy was graphically represented
as follows:
The promoter indicated that John would not have to pay any taxes. Because the
apartment building LLC was owned by the Nevis APT (“asset protection trust”),
profits generated from rents could pass offshore without taxes. The domestic LLC
would simply file zero return. The promoter further stated that insurance was not
needed on the apartment building because it was now in a bulletproof structure. As
well, by moving John’s significant brokerage account into the second APT, profits
could be generated offshore without U.S. or California taxes. Better yet, the monies
could be accessed by John, tax free, into the United States by simply requesting
the Nevis trustee—who received $3,000 a year for the service—wire the money.
116 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Roseville, LLC
20 unit apt. building
Nevis APT, I
Nevis APT II
Offshore brokerage
account
FIGURE 6.6
John followed the promoter’s advice, paid the $25,000 for setting it all up, and
in the first year his financial condition greatly improved. With his assets offshore
and no onshore taxes paid, he was doing really well. He wondered why everyone
didn’t do this. Then, in one day, two problems arose. He was sued for malpractice
by a patient and a tenant fell at the apartment building.
When the tenant’s claim was made, John informed the claimants that there was
no insurance. When the tenant’s lawyer indicated they would sue anyway, John calmly
replied that the building was owned by a bulletproof offshore asset protection trust.
The lawyer laughed and said John needed to get a local attorney to advise him.
When John did so he learned the bitter truth: You can’t protect U.S. real estate with
offshore entities. The apartment building was located in California and, as such, Cali-
fornia courts had jurisdiction. This was the law in all fifty states. The tenant could bring
a claim against the LLC, and with no insurance in place, the tenant could reach the en-
tire free-and-clear equity in the apartment building. The fact that the LLC was owned
by an offshore APT was of absolutely no consequence and offered zero protection.
John also spoke to his new lawyer about the malpractice claim. As a doctor, John
was sued individually. But he felt protected because his brokerage assets were pri-
vately all held offshore. This was when the second shoe dropped.
The lawyer explained that if John had followed all the tax reporting requirements
associated with offshore entities, a creditor could easily learn what John owned.
John was incredulous. The promoter had assured him that he had bulletproof
privacy and asset protection without the requirement of taxes or even tax reporting.
The lawyer had seen other professionals lured in before. He presented John with
the following chart detailing all the reporting requirements:
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 117
TABLE 6.1
IRS Requirement IRS Rule
U.S. persons must report all gratuitous and nongratuitous transfers
to a foreign trust.
Section 6048,
Section 1494
Foreign trusts owned by U.S. persons must file an annual tax return
on IRS Form 3520-A. U.S. persons are subject to a 5% penalty against
the value of offshore assets each year for failure to file.
Sections
671 to 679
U.S. persons receiving offshore distributions, whether taxable or
nontaxable, must report them or pay 35% penalty. Section 6677(a)
Foreign trusts owned by U.S. persons must appoint a U.S. agent so
that the IRS may examine offshore records.
Sections
7602 to 7604
CONTINUED
John now realized that everything the promoter said was false. Given the IRS
rules, there was no privacy, no tax savings, and no bulletproof protection. With the
help of his new lawyer, John cleaned up the offshore mess by paying significant IRS
penalties and fees. A demand to the Nevis promoter for the $25,000 John was lured
into paying for worthless strategies and documents went unanswered.
Offshore strategies do not work for onshore real estate.
Rule No. 5: Living Trusts Offer
No Asset Protection
Or: Will you please stop listening to these guys?
Many of you have seen the ads touting the significant benefits of living trusts.
Invariably, one of the great features mentioned is the ability of these trusts to
protect your assets.
While living trusts do offer certain advantages it is very important to clearly
recognize the one benefit they do not offer: asset protection.
Let’s take a closer look.
Primarily used for estate planning, the key benefit of a living trust is to avoid
probate. If you have only a will, or pass without a will, the distribution of your
estate is supervised by a local probate court. The probate process is long and
time consuming and a matter of public record, meaning that anyone can view
the file to see what assets are involved, and perhaps challenge the distribution.
As well, the attorney’s fees awarded for probate proceedings can be quite lu-
crative for the lawyers involved. For example, with a $1 million primary resi-
dence passing through a California probate, the court awards a statutorily set
attorney’s fee of $23,000. An executor is entitled to the same amount. These
fees are due, even if the home is fully encumbered by loans, and thus without
equity to pay the fees.
The solution is to set up a living trust, which is a trust document allowing
you to use an appointed trustee, typically a surviving spouse or other family
member, to distribute your assets without the need for probate court assistance
or review. The several thousand dollars spent on a living trust can easily save
many more thousands of dollars in probate fees.
TIP
118 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
CONTINUED
The living trust also features a great deal
of flexibility. It is a revocable trust, meaning
you can change its terms and/or benefici-
aries at any time. But that also means it
does not offer any asset protection. Because
it can be easily altered, a judgment creditor
can get a court order forcing a transfer of
any property from the trust to the litigation
party.
Despite this factual lack of asset protec-
tion, living trust promoters continue to sell
their services as offering such protection.
When challenged, they will parse and nar-
row their overly broad claims to suggest
that their living trusts help protect against creditor claims because they avoid
the very public probate process. And this is true. But just as deciding not to
sunbathe completely in the nude is not the same as the judicious use of sun-
screen, avoiding a fully public probate is not the same as proper asset protection.
By relying only on the former examples, you are going to get burned.
Real Life Story: Mario’s Mistake
Aclient of mine named Mario came to me after titling all of his assets—his house,
a rental fourplex, and a significant brokerage account—in the name of his living
trust. The formal name for the trust—The Mario T. and Carmen O. Sanchez Revoca-
ble Trust dated June 10, 2004—was given to the county recorder and assessor for
taking title to the two real estate properties. The Smith Barney broker took the
same name for the Sanchez’s brokerage account.
Mario indicated that the seminar promoter who set up his living trust assured
him that his assets were now fully protected. But now he was being sued by a tenant
who fell at the fourplex, and he wanted a second opinion.
It was not pleasant to inform Mario that his assets were not protected. By titling
everything in his living trust’s name, all of his assets were exposed to the tenant’s
claim.
When Mario asked if he could re-title everything into a more protective structure,
it was even more difficult to explain that it was now too late to do so. Once you’ve
been sued, or even threatened with suit, it is too late for asset protection.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 119
Sanchez Living Trust
Owns LLC
XYZ, LLC
Owns 4plex
Asset Protection
Probate Avoidance
FIGURE 6.7
The next question clients always have is: How do they combine the benefit of
a living trust’s probate avoidance with the necessity of asset protection? The an-
swer is simple, and it is graphically charted in Figure 6.7: The LLC is on title
with the county recorder as owning the fourplex. We have asset protection at
this level. The living trust owns the membership interests in XYZ, LLC. If both
Mario and Carmen die, the living trust document will dictate who owns the LLC
without the need for court supervision. At this level we have probate avoidance.
You can’t rely on the LLC for probate avoidance, and you can never
count on the living trust for asset protection, but in concert you can get both.
Properly structured LLCs and living trusts work well together and comple-
ment each other. You can’t rely on the LLC for probate avoidance, and you can
never count on the living trust for asset protection, but in concert you can get
both.
Rule No. 6: Land Trusts Offer Privacy
But Not Asset Protection
Or: Why privacy is not enough.
For many of the same reasons a living trust offers no asset protection, neither
does a land trust offer asset protection. In fact, a land trust is very similar to a
living trust. In both, you are transferring assets to a trust administered by a
trustee for your benefit.
According to the seminar promoters, the big benefit of a land trust is its pri-
vacy. By using a trustee other than yourself, your name can be kept off the chain
of title and public records. And while privacy is a good thing in this day and age,
it is not a perfect substitute for asset protection.
It is important to understand the structure of a
land trust in order to appreciate why asset pro-
tection is not inherent.
In our chart, Joe is identified on public records
as being the trustee, but Jane, as beneficiary, is not
anywhere identified. In this manner, privacy can
be achieved.
But the land trust, like the living trust, does not
protect Jane. If there is a lawsuit involving the
fourplex, a judgment rendered is against the ben-
TIP
120 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ABC
Land Trust
owns 4 plex
Jane, an individual
Beneficiary
FIGURE 6.8
eficiary. If Jane, as an individual, is the beneficiary, then any judgment is against
her personally, and all of her personally held assets are exposed.
There are two better ways to handle it. In example A, we show the beneficiary
to be an LLC.
In this way, a judgment attained against the beneficiary is rendered against a
limited liability entity. James’s personal assets are not exposed.
Of course, this structure entails setting up two structures—the land trust and
the LLC—as well as paying the trustee to serve every year. The same asset pro-
tection is attained by just setting up one entity, the LLC, as in example B.
If privacy is important you can certainly have the manager of the
LLC be a nominee, a person other than yourself.
If privacy is important you can certainly have the manager of the LLC be a
nominee, a person other than yourself. Our firm charges $650 a year for this
service. Others may charge more or less. But in this way you can achieve asset
protection and privacy, without the need to set up a land trust.
Rule No. 7: LLCs and LPs Are Excellent Asset
Protection Entities
Or: Why you want the charging order.
So, finally at rule seven we are getting to the good stuff. But as I mentioned,
there is so much misinformation out there that I felt it was important to first
dispel the myths and outright lies. With all that completed, I can now state that
LLCs and LPs offer excellent asset protection via the charging order.
Before reviewing the charging order, the difference between LLCs and LPs
must be explained. With an LP you must have at least one general partner and
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 121
ABC Land Trust
owns 4 plex
James’s LLC Beneficiary
Joe, Trustee James’s LLC
owns 4 plexor
Example A Example B
FIGURE 6.9
one limited partner. The general partner, if an individual, is personally respon-
sible for the LP’s activities. To encapsulate that unlimited liability you must
form a limited liability entity—a corporation or an LLC—to be the general part-
ner. While you are now fully protected, it is important to remember that you
have had to form two entities: first, the LP, and then second, a corporation or
LLC to be the general partner of the LP. With the LLC you need to form only
one entity, the LLC. Everyone is protected within the LLC. While LPs certainly
have their place, due to the need for only one entity instead of two, we shall use
the LLC example from here on out.
When it comes to protecting your real estate, we must also distinguish be-
tween attacks. A chart helps to explain:
In Attack No. 1, a tenant sues the LLC over a broken stairway. If successful,
the tenant can get what is inside the LLC—the fourplex—subject to any deeds
of trusts against the property.
But if the tenant can get the equity in the property, you ask, why even bother
with an LLC? Because without the LLC, the tenant could get everything John
owns—his house and bank account and everything else. The LLC limits the ten-
ant to just what’s in the LLC and shields your outside assets from attack.
In Attack No. 2, John gets in a car wreck, his insurance company won’t cover
him, and a judgment creditor (the person who won in court; we’ll call him Nate)
is seeking to get paid. Because the car wreck had nothing to do with the real es-
tate, Nate, the judgment creditor, can’t sue John’s LLC directly. Instead, Nate
must go after John’s membership interest in the LLC.
This is where the charging order comes into play. The charging order rule
provides that Nate can’t take possession of John’s membership interest, his own-
ership in the LLC. If Nate could, he could then sell the fourplex and get paid.
(And please note, this is what can happen with a corporation. The judgment cred-
itor gets the shares and takes control and sells all the corporate assets. Nevada, to
date, is the only state that has extended charging order protections to corporate
shares in corporations with between two and seventy-five shareholders.)
122 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
John, Member
John’s LLC
4 plex
Attack #1
Tenant
Attack #2
Car Wreck
FIGURE 6.10
The charging order instead allows Nate to stand in John’s shoes as a member
and receive distributions.
But what if no distributions are made? Then Nate gets nothing. He has to
wait to be paid. But what if money is made, there are taxes due, but no money is
distributed to even pay the taxes? This is called phantom income, and is frus-
trating to creditors. Under the charging order, Nate is standing in John’s shoes.
So he must pay the taxes on money he did not receive.
Most people do not want to be put in this position, which is why the proper
use of LLCs and LPs is an excellent deterrent to frivolous litigation. Not many
people want to fight it out in court to not receive any money and have to pay
taxes on the money they didn’t receive. Using LLCs and LPs can be an aid in
settlement discussions. They can even prevent a lawsuit from being filed in the
first place.
Using LLCs and LPs can be an aid in settlement discussions. They can
even prevent a lawsuit from being filed in the first place.
Charging order rules vary from state to state. Nevada and Wyoming have the
strongest laws. In those states, the exclusive creditor remedy is the charging
order. California has the weakest law. There are two California court cases al-
lowing creditors to pierce through and sell off LLC and LP assets to pay the
creditor.
So if you are going to buy property in California or one of the many other
states with weak asset protection laws (including Georgia), you have the choice
of setting up your LLC or LP in the state where the property is located or form-
ing in Nevada or Wyoming, and then qualifying in the state where the property
is located. The process of qualifying involves submitting, for example, the
Wyoming LLC papers and appropriate fees to the California secretary of state’s
office. If properly done it is always granted and keeps you within the law.
But the benefit is that if you get sued as in Attack No. 2, Wyoming or Nevada
law applies, not California law. A judgment creditor has to hire a Wyoming or
Nevada lawyer to fight a very uphill battle. This is what you want: a very strong
reason for predators to leave you alone.
More information on this is found in my book, How to Use Limited Liability
Companies and Limited Partnerships (SuccessDNA, 2009).
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 123
Rule No. 8: Segregation of Assets Is Good
Or: Let’s not put all of our eggs in one basket.
Since we’ve learned that LLCs and LPs are good entities for holding and pro-
tecting our real estate, the question then becomes: How many properties do I
put in each entity?
This is a judgment call on your part. But consider these scenarios involving
Liz, who owns twelve properties:
In Scenario 1, if a tenant sues over a problem at one property, the other eleven
properties are exposed to the attack. In Scenario 2, with three properties in
each LLC, only two additional properties are exposed if Liz is sued. Of course,
in Scenario 3 with only one property in each LLC, only one property is exposed.
I would never suggest a client hold twelve properties in one LLC. With that
many properties, your LLC is a rich target. In my experience, most of my clients
124 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
LLC
12 properties
Scenario #1
LLC
3 properties
LLC
3 properties
LLC
3 properties
LLC
3 properties
Scenario #2
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
LLC
1 property
Scenario #3
FIGURE 6.11
choose somewhere between Scenario 2 and 3. As is evident, the best asset pro-
tection is obtained through Scenario 3. Only one property is exposed to any one
attack.
But some clients don’t want to pay the one time initial set-up fees and con-
tinuing annual fees for twelve entities. In a state like California, where the an-
nual fee is $800 per entity, $9,600 a year for twelve entities is rather daunting.
So the choice of using one LLC to hold three properties is an option. It is your
call. But once again, the fewer properties you hold in each entity, the better
protected you will be.
Due to these issues, a new type of LLC is being touted to help reduce the
number of LLCs you need to form, called the “Series LLC.” Unfortunately, I
cannot recommend this new creature. It attempts to place separate properties
into separate series under one LLC, as follows:
The supposed benefit is that by setting up one LLC you can independently
protect two properties. The idea is that within the Series LLC there is an inter-
nal liabilities shield whereby a claim against the duplex in Series 1 does not
affect the fourplex in Series 2. The problem is there is no guidance whether or
not this supposed internal liability shield will be upheld. There are no court
cases in the subject, and conceptually the strategy may be difficult for a court
to uphold. Can two properties in the same state-chartered entity be protected
from each other? As well, what if one series goes bankrupt? Will the other series
be protected? No one knows.
The California tax authorities (the very aggressive Franchise Tax Board)
have their opinion. If you are going to try and set up one series to hold two
properties, they are going to charge you $800 per series, the same as if you had
set up two separate LLCs to begin with.
Of course, by setting up two separate LLCs you have the certainty of sepa-
rateness, rather than hoping that someday a court will miraculously rule that
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 125
Series #1
Duplex
Series #2
4plex
Series LLC
FIGURE 6.12
the muddled and imperfect concept of an internal liability shield actually makes
sense.
Stay away from promoters who would put you into this untested entity
called the Series LLC.
Interestingly, the American Bar Association brought together the nation’s
brightest lawyers to review LLC developments. After looking at the Series LLC
they declined to endorse the whole concept. Stay away from promoters who
would put you into this untested entity called the Series LLC.
Rule No. 9: Transfer Title into Your Entity
Or: What’s the point if you don’t?
All right, so you have set up one or more LLCs to protect your real estate. You
have the articles properly filed with the state. You have approved and signed
the operating agreement governing how the LLC will run. You have signed the
minutes of the first meeting and issued the membership certificates. All the im-
portant documents are in one binder in a safe place.
And remember, if all these steps are not taken, you are not ready. Beware of
promoters who will sell you the articles for just $99 but will not provide you
with an operating agreement, meeting minutes, and membership certificates.
Our firm charges $695 (or less if you are with Rich Dad) plus state filing fees
for the complete package—binder and all—with all your documents prepared
and finalized according to your specific needs, along with live phone support
through the whole process. You have the certainty of knowing that everything
is in order.
You’ve formed the asset protection entity. The next step is to transfer
title to the property into the LLC.
So assuming that everything is in order, now what?
Just because you have your asset protection entity in place, are your real es-
tate assets now protected? No, not yet. You must take the next step, which is to
transfer title to the property into the name of the LLC.
You must prepare a grant deed transferring ownership of your fourplex, for
example, from John Jones, as an individual, to the Jones Real Estate, LLC.
Several questions arise during this process.
TIP
TIP
126 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
First, is this a taxable event? Will the IRS or my state taxing authority assess
taxes when this happens? The answer is no. This is not a sale of the property—
you are not receiving any money in this transaction. Instead, it is a transfer. You
are transferring the property from yourself (as an individual) to yourself (your
new 100-percent-owned LLC).
The property goes into the LLC at its basis, which is the amount you paid for
the property originally. That basis, for tax purposes, remains the same once the
property is in the LLC. So, for example, if you paid $250,000 for your fourplex,
the basis of $250,000 remains once it is titled in the LLC’s name. There is no
gain in the transaction, and with no gain there are no capital gain or ordinary
income taxes.
If John Jones added new members (owners) into Jones Real Estate, LLC be-
fore or after the transfer, there could be a taxable event. Be sure to consult with
your advisors prior to any change in ownership.
The next question is: Are there any transfer taxes? The answer is: It depends.
Transfer taxes, a tax based upon the value of the property being transferred,
vary from state to state. Many states have an exception to their transfer taxes.
If you are transferring the property from yourself as an individual to yourself
as an LLC, there is no tax. Check with your local advisors to understand your
local rules.
Some states are very tricky, though. In Nevada, you are free to transfer title
into your LLC. But if you transfer it from the LLC back to yourself there is a
transfer tax. This situation occurs when you are refinancing and the lender
wants title to be in your name when the new first deed of trust attaches. Resist
the lender’s attempts to require this. He will argue that he doesn’t have security
if title is in the LLC. That is nonsense. With title in the LLC, he will have your
personal guarantee for the loan and a first deed of trust against the property,
the same as if it was in your individual name. He is equally protected in either
situation. Seek out lenders who are enlightened as to asset protection. They do
exist.
One state is very costly when it comes to transfer taxes. Pennsylvania charges
a 2 percent tax on the value of the property. So if you have a million dollar property
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 127
Jones Real Estate, LLC
John Jones,
An individual
Grant
Deed
FIGURE 6.13
with a mortgage of $950,000, you will still pay $20,000 (2 percent of $1 million)
for the privilege of holding title in the name of your LLC. Ouch.
The best course in all of this is to take title in the name of your LLC when
you first buy the property. With title in the proper entity at the start there is no
need for a later transfer, thus no issue of transfer taxes. There are lenders who
will let you take title at closing in the name of the LLC (or your LP). You can
view the LLCLoan.com Web site for more information.
Speaking of banks and lenders, the next questions is: Will they call the loan
if I transfer title? In dealing with clients, I have heard numerous times about
the attitude of lenders regarding transferring title into an LLC. In their reptilian
mind-set, they feel as if you are trying to hide assets from them and deny them
their due. Of course, as mentioned, if the lender has your personal guarantee
and a first deed of trust on the property, he is protected whether it is in your
name or the LLC’s name.
But that logic is lost on the functionaries at most lenders. They will argue
that if you make the transfer they will enforce the due-on-sale clause, which
states that the loan is due when you sell the property. Of course you haven’t
sold the property; you transferred it to yourself.
So what do you do?
In my experience it comes down to: Is it better to ask for permission or for-
giveness? If you ask most lenders, as if by reflex, they will say no. But if you just
go ahead and make the transfer without asking you can always say you are sorry
later. The chances are good you will never have such a conversation. In my
dealings, the lenders have never called a note. Will you be the first one? I don’t
know. But as long as you keep making the monthly payments, there is a very
good chance that they are not going to call the loan. Why would they want to
create such trouble for themselves, especially when they are being paid? If in
some bizarre case they do, refinance with a lender comfortable with LLCs. It’s
not as if you are going to lose your property if they call the note.
But some of you may be overly cautious in this realm, which is fine. If you
are willing to spend a little more money, there is another way to skin the cat.
Federal law holds that a lender can’t prevent you from transferring title from
your individual name to your living trust. Land trusts look like, and can be
named like, a living trust. So by forming a land trust and transferring title into
it, you may be able to accomplish your goals.
The extra money involved is the preparation of a land trust. Our firm charges
$395 for such a document; others may charge more or less. But remember, as
discussed in Rules 5 and 6, neither land trusts nor living trusts offer asset pro-
128 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
tection. So when utilizing this strategy you still need to form that LLC and
name the LLC as beneficiary of the land trust.
With the title transferred to the land trust and an LLC as beneficiary of the
land trust you may be able to get the protection you need without irrational
lender interference.
The only group you do need to notify when you transfer title is your insurance
company. It needs to know the policy is in your LLC name and not in your per-
sonal name. Otherwise, and this does happen, your friendly insurance company
may claim it was insuring you as an individual, not your LLC, and use that as an
excuse to deny any coverage in the event of a problem at the property. And
while the insurance company may notify the lender of the change in insureds,
that usually does not lead to due-on-sale threats.
A final question always arises as to why to use a grant deed instead of a quit
claim deed to transfer the title. A quit claim deed merely transfers everything
you claim you may own to the next party. A grant deed is a much more affirma-
tive grant of property rights. As such, in many cases, title insurance coverage
flows to the next party with a grant deed. Since you are essentially transferring
property from yourself to yourself, it makes sense to give yourself the most
complete rights you can. Use a grant deed.
Rule No. 10: Don’t Set Up More
Entities Than Necessary
Or: Beware of promoters telling you otherwise.
Several years ago I was at a real estate event in San Francisco. A lady approached
me after hearing my speech, in which I argued that people should not go over-
board and set up more entities than are needed.
I was shocked by her story.
Jane was looking to invest in her first duplex. She had previously attended a
seminar on asset protection given by a self-styled asset protection guru. The
seminar had been sponsored by a local real estate organization. She trusted that
the group would provide her only with competent service providers.
The asset protection guy indicated that she needed the following structure
for protection: (See Figure 6.14.)
Jane stated that the man convinced her that for the necessary protection she:
1.Needed the LP to hold her LLC. The LP was then, in turn, owned by the Ne-
vada Asset Protection Trust and the Offshore Asset Protection Trust. These
structures gave her extra layers of protection.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 129
130 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
2.Needed an S corporation to manage the LP in order to achieve necessary as-
set protection.
3.Needed the C corporation to manage the LLC in order to achieve significant
tax savings.
The cost of this structure was $20,000. The annual fees were more than $5,000
to maintain all the entities. Jane was in tears because after spending such a
large sum of money for asset protection, she no longer had enough money for
the down payment on her duplex.
I told her the truth. She had spent way too much money. The asset protection
man’s arguments were false. Extra layers of entities do not necessarily provide
extra layers of protection. If you aren’t making any money yet, you don’t really
need a C corporation to save on taxes. The structure they created was designed
for their profit, not her needs. Jane asked me to give her a chart of what she
needed to protect her duplex. It took five seconds to chart her strategy:
LLC
Holds Duplex
FIGURE 6.15
C Corporation
Management
Co./Tax Savings
S Corporation
General Partner
of L.P.
LLC
Holds Duplex
Limited Partnership
Holds LLC interest
Nevada Asset
Protection Trust
Offshore Asset
Protection Trust
FIGURE 6.14
Jane was in shock. She asked how the local real estate group promoter, a
person she trusted, could let such a snake in the door to present to them. I told
her something that was an open secret in that business. The local promoter in
many cases receives 50 percent of what the service provider sells. As such, there
is a powerful economic incentive for local promoters to tout the value, integrity,
and importance of the service provider, as well as the urgent need for the serv-
ices offered. In Jane’s case, the local promoter may have made as much as
$10,000 for doing so.
Jane calculated that fifteen people had signed up for all this and figured the
promoter must have cleared a total of $150,000 at the one asset protection event.
She was furious and sickened by what had happened. She vowed never to invest
in real estate. I tried to counsel her but could not. She had gone through a hor-
rible experience and was adamant that her decision was final.
Do not let Jane’s experience be yours. Real estate is an excellent way to build
wealth, but at some points during your journey you will need to be able to nav-
igate through shark-infested waters.
Important Tips
• Engage in critical thinking.
• Ask yourself if the “expert” really is such an expert.
• Ask yourself if the services are for your legal benefit or the expert’s financial
benefit.
• Use healthy skepticism and old-fashioned due diligence.
• Check around, and don’t bite at the first supposedly “discounted” offer.
These tips will work out to your advantage.
That said, asset protection, as we have seen, is important. You want to take
the necessary steps to protect your real estate assets and your financial future.
The correct use of entities will greatly assist you in achieving this goal.
Remember, asset protection is neither overly difficult nor outrageously ex-
pensive. And with critical thinking, never allow someone to tell you it is.
Good luck in all your asset-protected real estate investing.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 131
Where to Learn More
www.corporatedirect.com
www.sutlaw.com
www.successdna.com
Garrett Sutton is a Rich Dad’s Advisor and is the author of Own Your
Own Corporation, The ABC’s of Getting Out of Debt, The ABC’s of Writing
Winning Business Plans, and How to Buy and Sell a Business. He is also
the co-author of Real Estate Advantages. Garrett is an attorney with more
than twenty-five years experience in assisting individuals and businesses
to determine their appropriate corporate structure, limit their liability,
protect their assets, and advance their financial, personal, and credit success goals. He has
been featured in the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times, among others. His firm,
Sutton Law Center, has offices in Reno, Nevada; Jackson Hole, Wyoming; and Rocklin, Cali-
fornia, and accepts new clients at (800) 700-1430.
132 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
This book is called The Real Book of Real Estate because the people I chose to
be a part of it are real-life real estate investors. They are not people who just
teach real estate and make their money teaching. Wayne like the others who I
asked to be part of this book, makes his money doing what he teaches. He is one of
the best real estate investors and one of the best finance guys I know. He is, like all
of the advisors in this book, doing his own deals while teaching others how to be
rich using the same methods and formulas he uses himself. I am always leery of
people who give advice and say, “Trust me.” Then they don’t do what they are
telling me to do. Those are not the kind of teachers I want around me. And they
are not the kind of teachers who are in this book. This book is real people and real-
life real estate strategies that they use to build wealth.
One of the things I like most about Wayne is how his brain goes into overdrive
whenever he sees a roadblock in the way of his or one of his client’s goals. When it
comes to finance, nothing stops Wayne’s creative mind. Obstacles become excuses
for Wayne to find innovative ways to get around them.
Wayne is an excellent teacher, and he has taught me more through example
and through the deals we do together than even he probably knows. He can take
things that are very complex and make them simple so that I can understand
7Wayne PALMER
Of Marbles and Capital
133
them. When I first met Wayne, I could tell from the way he talked and the way he
carried himself that he spoke from years of experience, successes, and failures.
Life is the best teacher, and that’s why Wayne’s chapters and the others in this
book are so powerful. They are full of stories and experiences that are entertaining
and educational. Education should be fun. If it isn’t, I’m not interested. Wayne is
a great communicator. He has a way of telling a story and teaching a lesson that
keeps you wanting more. Read this chapter, and you’ll see what I mean.
—Robert Kiyosaki
O n the bookshelf opposite the desk in my office sits an antique jar filled
with marbles. It is there to remind me of the importance of capital. As a
fourth grader, I didn’t call it capital, and I surely didn’t realize the role that
capital plays in business. I just knew I wanted to play marbles with the other
kids, and I couldn’t get in the game unless I owned some marbles, or at least
one marble.
Coming from a family of modest means, it was out of the question to ask for
money for marbles. I accepted that I should expect only a few new toys on my
birthday and on Christmas. If I didn’t take care of the toys I received twice a
year, I would go without or make my own. I made trucks out of scrap lumber,
bows and arrows out of whittled sticks, and forts out of haystacks, but I could
think of no way to make a marble. Every day I watched with envy as other boys,
and a few bold girls, played with those flashing glass spheres on the playground.
I studied their techniques and strategies. I ached to get in the game. I had a
plan as to how I would approach the game if I could find a way to play, but I
was locked out. I had no “taw.”
Where I come from, a taw is that one precious marble that each player selects
in order to play with the greatest skill. It is the perfect weight. It fits the thumb
just so. It is the single marble out of the entire bag that the player feels will give
him or her the greatest advantage in a particular game. I knew if I could just
find a taw, I could get in the game.
“FIND A TAW!” That was it! I suddenly remembered playing along the side
of our home as a five-year-old. While digging in the dirt to build roads for my
toy cars, I had unearthed a white marble. Having no value to me at the time, I
left it lying in my diggings where I had found it. I wondered if it was still there.
I rushed to the barn and grabbed a shovel. I turned up the dirt and carefully
134 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
chopped through the overturned earth to loosen it. I got down on my hands
and knees and sifted through the soil with a spoon. After a few minutes of min-
ing, I felt and heard a click on the end of the spoon. My heart jumped into my
throat. I felt a burst of excitement tingling in my temples. I brushed back the
soil, and there it was—a somewhat dirty, but perfectly formed, ivory-colored
marble.
Something shifted within me at that moment. I felt a rush of freedom and
opportunity. I was wild with excitement that I could finally get in the game on
the playground. It was as if I had come of age or had been declared worthy to
be a real boy. The doors to my future opened wide. I was prepared to be a marble
master, or so I thought. Owning my own taw became a right of passage for me.
Suddenly, my jubilation was cut short by a flood of fears that crowded my
thoughts. In every game of marbles, like battles in a war, someone wins and
someone loses. What if I lose my only marble? Where will I find another one?
Who am I to think I could win when the other kids have been playing for
months or years? What if I get totally embarrassed? What if I start crying right
there in front of the toughest guys and the bravest girls? What will they say
about me? What if they make fun of me? I was petrified.
As I clutched the marble in my hand, I realized how critical it was to my
game and yet knew I couldn’t play without risking it. Finally, I decided that if I
must take the chance, I would take the smallest risk possible. I would challenge
someone of the lowest skill level. Because I had been watching others play mar-
bles for months, I knew who the champions were and who to avoid. Even if
they called me out and teased me for being too chicken to play them, I would
refuse to risk my taw on a game I couldn’t win. I would play to win by carefully
choosing the first games I entered and the opponents I faced.
I took my chances and got in the game. By the end of fourth grade, my shoot-
ing skills had improved considerably. I dared to play anyone in the school under
the right conditions, and I had a gallon can full of marbles as proof of my
progress. They were treasure to me. Each one held a memory, and each had a
story of how it had been won. I kept my original white taw safely in a smaller
pouch to remind me of how far I had come. It was no longer my best marble for
play, but would always be my favorite, for sentimental reasons.
Sometimes when I teach seminars, I ask which of the attendees consider
themselves to be capitalists. Almost every hand in the room goes up. Then I ask
how many have capital. Most of the hands go down. To play in the game of cap-
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 135
italism, one must own or control some capital. Like marbles, capital is the “taw”
that allows us to play the game. Raising capital is a vital skill for anyone who
wants to get out of the rat race, as taught by the Rich Dad CASHFLOW game.
Louis Kelso, the father of the Employee Stock Option Plan in the
United States said, “The right to life implies the right to earn a good income.
When 90 percent of the goods and services are produced by capital workers—
people who own capital—as it is in an industrial society like ours, you can’t
earn a good income without owning capital.”
(BILL MOYERS, A WORLD OF IDEAS [NY: DOUBLEDAY, 1990])
Robert Kiyosaki expressed the same principle in one of the Rich Dad business
schools, showing the hierarchy of the economic food chain:
You may notice that those who work for money are on the bottom of the
food chain. They get only crumbs, after everyone else has taken the best returns.
Also notice that the capitalists are at the top of the food chain. Everyone works
for the capitalists. Capitalists fund all enterprises. The capitalists own and con-
trol the majority of the wealth. The biggest returns, the best leverage, and the
greatest tax advantages go to the capitalists. The capitalists are also those who
take the biggest risks. Still, given a choice, why would anyone want to remain
an employee, rather than becoming a capitalist?
Working for money is an arduous way to move up the economic food chain.
If you continue to work only for money you will never escape the trap of the rat
race. What is the key to economic freedom? It is the ownership or control of
TIP
136 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Capitalists
Investment Bankers
Corporations
Mutual Funds
Stockholders
Employees/Laborers
FIGURE 7.1
capital. If you want to be a capitalist instead of an employee, capital is the key.
Capital is your taw. It empowers you to leverage and move ahead faster.
So how does someone who has no capital get started? Where do you go to
get your first marble?
There are three basic ways:
1.Save it from your earnings
2.Borrow it from someone else
3.Trade ownership (equity) for capital
Let’s look at each of these methods in more detail.
Saving
Accumulating seed capital by saving money is the long, hard way to get your
taw, but it has been proven viable by fledgling capitalists since ancient times. In
his classic book The Richest Man in Babylon, George S. Clason shares a fable
that clearly shows how one can go from the Rich Dad E quadrant (employee)
to the S quadrant (specialist/self-employed), and even to the I quadrant (in-
vestor), by frugality and sacrifice. In America and other capitalist countries,
immigrants prove over and over again that by working hard—sometimes even
for subsistence wages—and by saving part of what they earn, individuals or
families can rise quickly to capital ownership and wealth. Setting aside a portion
of one’s labor to accumulate an initial capital stake is within everyone’s reach,
just as I employed my own labor to dig in the dirt until I found my first marble.
However, no matter how much capital you acquire by your own labor, your
earnings will always be limited by the hours you can spend at work. Using only
the capital you can save from your own earnings means that you will be severely
restricted in growth and income.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 137
FIGURE 7.2 Rich Dad CASHFLOW® Quadrant
138 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Borrowing
Back in fourth grade, I may have been able to get into a game of marbles sooner
if I had thought to borrow a taw from someone else. But how would I have re-
paid the debt if I had lost? These are the kinds of risks we must consider when
borrowing capital as well. As my grandpa Palmer used to say, “Any damn fool
can run into debt, but everyone will crawl out!” In other words, it is easy to go
into debt, but not usually so easy to get back out. Borrowing money has conse-
quences, and it is wise to fully consider those consequences before signing for
the debt. Under most market conditions, borrowing money is relatively easy
for strong investors with viable collateral. Paying it back as agreed will deter-
mine the true nature of your character and business skills. If you become good
at taking care of Other People’s Money (OPM), you will likely have plenty of
capital with which to pursue your investment opportunities.
Bad deals chase the money, while the money chases good ones.
The term OPM has become a popular acronym for the concept of raising
capital. OPM can refer to borrowed capital as well as equity capital. It is some-
times spoken of with reckless abandon, as though getting others to back your
idea is as easy as asking. As simple as some might make it appear, there are
proven guidelines and important legalities for qualifying yourself and your proj-
ect to attract the capital of others. I have often heard this said by lenders: “Bad
deals chase the money, while the money chases good ones.” In the end, how
successful you are at borrowing will be largely determined by the answers to
these two questions:
1.How viable is the opportunity?
2.How clear, concise, complete, compelling, and convincing is the communi-
cation contained in your loan package?
Let’s consider these questions one at a time.
Viable Opportunity
First and foremost, what you propose must be viable—it must make sense. How
do we define a viable opportunity? It is something that the average lender could
look at and say, “Wow, I believe that will work.” The projections of profit are
based on reasonably probable outcomes, not on pie-in-the-sky dreams. The as-
sumptions that lead to the bottom line are in harmony with the way things
TIP
work in the real world. The outcome is not dependent upon anyone turning
back the tides or walking on water or otherwise doing things that mere humans
have never done before. More importantly, the lender must believe that you can
do it. Just because Donald Trump did it doesn’t mean the average Joe can pull
it off. The outcome must be highly likely, given the skills, experience, and re-
sources of your team. Above all, it must be economic, which means it must
make money. Why else would a lender risk capital on your idea?
Loan Package
Two of our companies do real estate lending. As lenders, we see and hear dozens
of loan requests each week. Not long ago I received an e-mail from a would-be
borrower that consisted of merely six line items, each with a large number at
the end of the line, all totaling $2.44 million. There was nothing else in the e-
mail. No borrower information, no outline of the ownership entity, no informa-
tion about the structure of the proposed loan, no indication of the value of the
properties that were to be pledged as collateral. Frankly, such a proposal is an
insult to a lender. Underwriters rarely have enough time to sort through the
mountains of paper and electronic packages that end up on their desks each
day. To have borrowers suppose that, as a lender, I am going to hold their hand,
do their work for them, beg for the documents that are needed to underwrite
the loan, or spend hours on the phone with them, educating them in the busi-
ness of borrowing, communicates to me only how naïve, or perhaps lazy, the
borrower must be. We do not risk our capital on naïve or lazy people. We prefer
hardworking, well-informed, and experienced borrowers. They have a better
track record of paying us back. To avoid making a complete fool of yourself,
wasting everyone’s time, and killing your chances of getting a loan, take the
time to compile a complete and easy-to-read loan package. In other words, be
prepared!
How to Prepare a Loan Package
At a minimum, a good commercial real estate loan package includes the follow-
ing twelve items:
1.A brief Executive Summary: This is a one-page concise summary of the
loan request in outline form. An executive summary typically includes:
a. Name and contact information of the borrower;
b. A description of the collateral property (address, type, age);
c. The requested loan amount; and
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 139
d. The proposed terms of the loan (loan to value, interest rate, maturity
date, and balloon or call date, if any).
2.A Table of Contents for the remainder of the package: This allows the
Lender to quickly and conveniently find any information that may be of in-
terest without reading the entire binder. It is also in your best interest to in-
sert tabs at the front of each section to make the package easy to navigate.
The more convenient it is to access the information, the more likely it is that
your loan proposal will receive full consideration.
3.Maps: Include in the map section a state map, a city map, and a plat map of
the subject property/site.
4.Photos: Include a small group of pictures that give a good idea of the prop-
erty, its condition, and a sense of the neighborhood.
5.Appraisal: If you’ve had a professional appraisal done on the property, in-
clude the full document, or at a minimum, the summary pages. If there is no
appraisal, provide some estimation of value, based on cost, comparative mar-
ket analysis, or a list of comparable sales in the marketplace.
6.Environmental Study: Because environmental contamination is almost al-
ways an automatic deal killer, it is in your best interest to pay for a Phase One
Environmental Report and include it in the package. Such reports are com-
piled by environmental engineering firms. The only exception may be when
the property is known to have had zero exposure to contaminants, such as
might likely be the case with raw farm land or mountaintop property.
7.Operating Statement and/or Projections (“Pro forma”): The operating
statement sets forth the historic annual income and expenses on the prop-
erty, usually for the past two to three years. This is one of the most important
parts of the package so take extra care to make sure you compile and report
this information accurately. Perhaps nothing will destroy the credibility of
your proposal faster than a misstatement of the income or expenses on the
property. The Pro forma is a projection of future income and expenses related
to the property. An inaccurate or incomplete Pro forma is evidence that you,
the borrower, have not entirely thought through the financial future of the
project. That will likely result in the loan being declined.
8.Borrower Financial Information and Credit: This section will typically in-
clude the balance sheets and income statements on you, the borrower, and
Guarantors, as well as tax returns for the prior two years. Each borrower
and Guarantor will likely be required to submit a credit report or allow the
lender to pull one.
140 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
9.Management Experience: Make sure that you have a person on your team
with the experience to manage the kind of project you are proposing. Include
in the loan package a copy of his or her résumé or professional qualifications
and experience.
10.Use of Funds Statement: The use of funds statement is a one-page (or less)
description of how you will use the borrowed funds. If the proposed loan is
intended to be a purchase money mortgage, which is a term used to describe
any mortgage that is taken out to pay for a property at the time of purchase,
also include a statement of the source of the down payment.
11.Title Report: Provide a title report on the property from a local title com-
pany. Such a report is generally called a PR (Preliminary Report) or a Title
Commitment.
12.Ask in advance about any submission guidelines your lender might have
and if he would prefer to have you submit your package electronically or in
hard copy.
Perhaps most importantly, once your loan is approved and closed, pay it back
on time. Nothing will enhance your status with lenders or do more to encourage
additional funding of your investments than precise performance on your part.
I relish the comment Lee Iacocca made when he was chairman of Chrysler
Corporation. He said, “We borrow money the old-fashioned way; we pay it
back.”
Equity
Raising equity capital is another matter altogether. First of all, there are very
stringent securities laws that govern the raising of capital. Do not start soliciting
funds for your business without consulting a good lawyer to make sure you are
within legal guidelines. The penalties for breaking securities laws can be severe.
Whereas lenders primarily look at collateral values, cash flows, and the
strength of the borrower to repay his loans, venture capitalists who may con-
sider investing in your enterprise additionally look to management expertise
and a solid business plan. Raising capital for real estate can take on elements of
both borrowing and venture capital. When others approach me to be their po-
tential joint venture partner, I want to see all of the information contained in
the loan packaging above. Additionally, I must also be satisfied concerning the
following:
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 141
• Who is providing what to the venture? A real estate investment is made up
of two basic parts: money and management. Who will provide the money
and in what increments? And who will do the work of managing the project?
Some investments require more money than work, and some require more
work than money. Our companies generally negotiate to provide debt or eq-
uity. We may also sometimes choose to structure a combination of both. As
equity investors, or venture capitalists, we will require our potential partners
to answer these questions:
• How much capital are we being asked to risk?
• For how long will it be at risk?
• Will our rate of return be based on an interest rate paid periodically, with an
equity kicker in the end, or will it be based solely on the upside equity and
cash flow?
• What management skills are required to protect the capital and deliver the
projected returns?
• Does anyone on the team possess these skills or will they be contracted from
outside of the ownership group?
• How much of our time and expertise will be required?
• How will those who contribute their time to the project be compensated?
Will they receive money or additional equity in the property?
• What is the order of priority for each team member in the disbursement of
funds? Most of the time, a venture is structured to first pay expenses, includ-
ing interest and personnel costs; second, the costs of sale; third, a payment
of the remaining principal balance on the debt; fourth, a return of the initial
joint venture (equity) capital; and finally, the disbursement of profits to each
partner at the pre-agreed percentages. As sponsors of an opportunity, we
sometimes agree to disburse profits to our money partners as a first priority,
until they have achieved a predetermined rate of return, with remaining
profits going to ourselves or to the group at large.
A Word About Legal Compliance
I have learned just enough about securities laws to know that they are compli-
cated, diverse, and generally unforgiving. Inasmuch as I am not qualified or
willing to give anyone legal advice, the only guidance I will venture to suggest
is this: Make sure you get competent legal counsel if you are going to ask anyone
else to participate in your projects with you. Do not underestimate the serious-
ness of even unintentional violations of securities regulations. The Securities
142 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
and Exchange Commission (SEC) is the regulator of securities issues on the
federal level in the United States. Each state also has wide-ranging, and some-
times peculiar regulations for the issuance and governance of securities within
its respective boundaries. You are well advised to stay in compliance with the
rules and regulations they administer, when your venture falls within the defi-
nition of a securities transaction.
A Word About Entity Structure
It is critical to consider what legal structure will best serve the ownership group
and its purposes. Will it be a corporation, a general partnership, a limited part-
nership, or a limited liability company? The structure chosen is more important
than it may appear on the surface, especially when the tax position of each in-
vestor is taken into consideration. Once again, seek competent legal advice in
forming the entity that will own and manage the investment. Garrett Sutton’s
chapter in this book is a great source of information, as is Garrett himself.
If I had been more astute at age ten, perhaps I could have convinced another
player to spot me some marbles from his bag, with an agreement to share my
winnings with him. In the end, I may have had fewer marbles, or I may have
had more. My treasure would clearly have been reduced by the profits I shared
with my partner, while on the other hand, getting in the game earlier may have
resulted in more winnings over a longer period of time. You will face similar
decisions as you decide how you will raise capital.
Regardless of which method you use to capitalize your investments—saving,
borrowing, or equity—please consider the following perspective on money. If
you use your own capital, it is probably painfully clear that it represents months,
perhaps years, of work, sacrifice, and discipline on your part. Until we have a
grubstake of our own we are stuck in the rat race. As employees, we trade our
time for money. Our time is largely someone else’s capital as long as we are
stuck in the E quadrant.
In the end, the time we spend on this planet equals life. Most people
would agree that a human life is sacred and carries a higher value than almost
anything else on earth. Since we trade our time—our very lives—for money or
capital, I conclude that capital equals life. If that is the case, then capital, like
life, is sacred and should be treated as such.
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 143
How much different would the annals of business history read if executives
regarded Other People’s Money as a sacred trust, akin to life itself? When an
investor has worked all of his or her life to accumulate capital, then invests in a
venture that is mismanaged or illegally operated and the capital is lost, a very
real part of that investor’s life is destroyed. For the elderly, in particular, the
hours, days, weeks, and years are irreplaceable. Risking your own marbles,
your own time, your own life capital, is one thing. Taking upon yourself the
moral responsibility of safeguarding someone else’s capital is another. I en-
courage you to approach the use of OPM with this kind of serious moral
grounding. There is nothing else you can do that will have a more positive in-
fluence on your success. If you conduct yourself with integrity not only in
word, but in deed, and keep the capital entrusted to you secure and productive,
a time will soon come when you will likely have more capital than you can put
to use. As suggested earlier in this chapter, the money will begin to chase you,
which is perhaps a crude way of saying that as you respect capital, you will at-
tract capital.
Think of all the capital that exists in the world. Land, minerals, timber, plants,
animals, fish, and even some insects and reptiles have capital value. In addition,
tools, equipment, machinery, processes, intangibles (such as intellectual assets
like software and know-how), and all forms of money and securities represent
capital. Various forms of naturally occurring energy, such as solar, wind, tidal,
gravitational, geothermal, human labor, and animal labor (horsepower) consti-
tute capital as well.
The reason I ask you to consider this enormous supply of capital is to em-
power you to overcome any thoughts of scarcity. The more we need the money,
the less likely we are to believe that it exists in abundance. Under such circum-
stances, fear overpowers faith that money is available in ample supply.
Even in difficult economic times, capital is rarely destroyed. It only
changes hands or changes forms.
Consider how capital flows around the world. It is mind-boggling to ponder
the number of individual transactions that take place every day. From the child
buying penny candy at the grocery store, to international banks moving moun-
tains of money, to balancing government currency accounts, there are billions
of individual capital flows that take place every day. In its most basic definition,
capital is either energy or a symbol of energy. Capital is the energy that flows
through each economic transaction, not the money itself. The money is only a
TIP
144 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
symbol of the energy, the value, the increment of human life (time) that is in-
herent in the underlying asset, process, or function.
When we start to see these countless transactions as flows of economic en-
ergy, having real value, instead of as merely the exchange of money, the true
nature of capital is revealed. It is not in scarce supply. It is, in fact, infinitely
abundant. It is not all locked up in vaults where you cannot get to it. You already
possess a great deal of it in your time, your talent, your knowledge, and in your
ability to start where you are to increase your stock of capital. One buried marble
properly played soon becomes a bag of marbles and perhaps even a barrel. You
need not wait for anyone else to begin growing your capital. You already have
the power to start where you are to increase your holdings.
What, then, is the trigger that causes capital to flow in each of these individ-
ual transactions? I believe it is human emotion that drives each exchange. Com-
merce is driven by emotions such as need, greed, desire, trust, or confidence.
Someone once told me that “emotion” is energy in motion. See if this is true by
considering the following: If a person needs an expensive operation to preserve
health and life, he will do all in his power to gather the money to pay for it. If
someone is hungry, he will move what capital he has to someone who has food
for sale. If I believe you can teach me something of value, I may direct some of
my personal resources to you for books or seminars or personal coaching. If
you decide to visit your grandma in a distant place, you will most likely pay for
transportation to get from where you are to where you want to go. Notice how
in each of these examples the influence of human desires causes the economic
energy (money) to move.
My family once took a chartered bus trip across the United States. As I sat
on the bus, gazing out the window, I came to a profound realization. Somewhere
in the middle of Nebraska, while seeing farm after farm and wondering about
the people who lived on each one, it struck me. I imagined a couple of people
living in each farmhouse who had fallen in love and married. Their love brought
children into the family. Every day they worked the farm to provide for their
loved ones. It was then that I suspected the lyrics to the old song that my dad
sang to my mother were true, “Love Makes the World Go ’Round.” I realized in
that moment that the economy was actually the energy of human love and other
human desires that spur us to creation and consumption of various kinds.
As we continued down Interstate 80 on the same bus, I noticed all the trucks
passing by me in both directions, carrying the freight produced in the factories
and foundries of America. It was then that I first knew that all would be well
and that the economy would go on because people would keep falling in love,
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 145
keep having children, and keep working hard to give them a good life. The
trucks would keep running, and capital would continue to be exchanged in
countless daily transactions that support the needs and desires of human beings.
No force on earth, no government blunder, could bring the real economy to a
halt. It was energy in motion and would remain in motion as long as individual
human beings had any desires for a better life.
So, since capital exists in abundance all around you, how do you cause it to
move from wherever it is now to where you want it to be?
1.First, establish the mind-set of abundance. Ask yourself if you are operating
from fear or from trust, from doubt or from confidence. Be constantly mind-
ful that there is no shortage of capital and that it is eager to flow to you, if
you do what is necessary to attract it and safeguard it. A dear friend of mine
shared with me that her family loves blueberries. She had the feeling blue-
berries were scarce because they were quite expensive at the grocery store.
One day she had the chance to take her boys to the country and pick blue-
berries on a farm. For the same price she paid for a small box at the store,
she could buy two big flats from the farmer, and he let them eat all they
wanted while they picked. She realized that blueberries were in abundant
supply once she had a change of perspective.
2.Qualify yourself to attract capital flows. Make a conscious choice to adopt
an energy within and around yourself that is harmonious with the energy of
the capital you wish to attract. What kind of energy attracts capital? Read on!
3.Practice full accountability. Take the committed stand that Gene Kranz,
Apollo 13 mission control director (played by the actor Ed Harris in the
movie) took during that fated mission. If you saw the movie, you may re-
member that there was an explosion that damaged the command module
while on its journey to the moon, threatening its ability to return to earth.
The astronauts had to extend their supplies of oxygen and electricity to sur-
vive. On the ground in Houston, Kranz pulled his team together and declared,
“We never lost an American in space. We’re sure as hell not going to lose one
on my watch. Failure is not an option.” He demanded that his engineers find
a way to bring the crew home safely, using only the resources the astronauts
had on board. Capital rushes toward that kind of commitment because com-
plete accountability inspires confidence, creativity, and can-do attitudes. To
the total extent of your ability and capacity take personal responsibility to
make sure that no one ever loses a nickel on your watch.
4.Work with integrity. To me, the meaning of integrity is clear. It is simply to
do what you say you will do, when you say you will do it, and to tell the truth
146 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
in all things and under all conditions. Integrity is what integrity does. Being
reliable will set you apart from most of your competition. People want to do
business with those who are dependable.
5.Disclose. Provide your potential lenders or investors with all of the infor-
mation you would want to know if you were in their shoes and were consid-
ering placing capital with you.
6.Establish the habit of over-communicating. Keep your lenders and in-
vestors constantly informed of important details. This attention shows re-
spect and accountability.
7.Prepare yourself to attract capital flows. You will notice I differentiate be-
tween qualification and preparation. Qualification is about energy, compe-
tency and your state of being. Preparation is the act of taking care of the
mechanics and the details, where the rubber meets the road. My experience
tells me these are the key areas of preparation.
8.Know your business. Know a good deal from a bad one. Drive yourself to
constantly study and stay abreast of the real estate industry. What are the
trends in financing, demographics, product types, customer preferences,
building materials and methods, technology, municipal codes, taxation, reg-
ulations, and risk management, to name but a few.
9.Write a business plan. Create a comprehensive plan that fully explores the
risks and responses that will be required to generate a profit.
10.Have multiple exit strategies. Do you have enough confidence in your pro-
posed investment, based on solid economic principles and potentially chang-
ing conditions, to absolutely believe that you can achieve the projected
results? Have you run different scenarios? Do you have multiple exit strate-
gies? If the worst happens, how will you protect the capital that your in-
vestors have entrusted to you?
11.Define and staff up to provide core competencies. Do you, or does your
team, have the skills, the core competencies, needed to fully execute your
business plan? If something is lacking, are you realistically addressing it?
How will you compensate for the weakness? Will you hire someone with
that skill? Will you take on another partner who has the talent? Just imagine
trying to drive your car with one flat tire! Your business won’t run smoothly
if there is a “flat” on the team. An abundance of talent will overcome a mul-
titude of challenges.
12.Develop a stellar track record. Protect your reputation by over-performing.
If you are just starting out and have no track record, be honest about it, and
clearly communicate to potential lenders and investors that you are aware
of your lack of experience. Be prepared to show them how you will deal with
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 147
any shortfall in your experience. Remember, experience and expertise can
be hired, too. Robert Kiyosaki continually emphasizes that he isn’t the
smartest guy in every situation, so he surrounds himself with those who un-
derstand certain things better than he does. I can’t think of a time that I was
unable to find the talent I needed. People of extreme capability love the game
and are usually eager to play with a quality team, even if it is their experience
the team must rely upon.
13.Take care of business. It has been my experience that my JOB ONE is to
fully focus on whatever business I am operating. Businesses don’t run them-
selves. Running a viable business requires the best energy and efforts of the
team. Rich rewards are in store for those who give their all to protect busi-
ness operations and to provide all it takes to prosper and turn a profit.
Protect-Provide-Prosper-Profit
When a business does well, everyone wants to be a part of it. Wall Street clamors
to buy shares in any enterprise that is producing a healthy return on investment.
On the other hand, you have likely seen the statistics that suggest as many as 90
percent of small businesses fail within the first five years. People and companies
squander billions of dollars in investment capital on poor business investments.
If you want to attract capital to your business, make your business work. Make
it profitable. Infuse it with passion and the prospect of continued success. Peo-
ple invest in real estate ventures to make money. If you develop a proven talent
for generating solid returns and offer such an opportunity to others with proper
disclosures, they will naturally want to be a part of your enterprise.
As you attract the capital of others, no matter how small-scale at first, and
take exquisite care of that capital, your investors will spread the word. Others
will be knocking on your door to become part of a good thing. It is almost as if
the only thing you need to do is to prove your ability to run your company hon-
orably and profitably. If you do that in the face of the corporate corruption that
seems to be more and more prevalent, capital will seek a home in your enter-
prise. However, remember that even when potential investors come to you
through referrals, you still have the same responsibility to provide all of the
disclosures required by law.
I know these principles work because I applied them to build my own group
of companies from zero to millions in assets over a sixteen-year period. What I
am sharing with you I have learned from firsthand experience. Business school
baloney would have you believe that there is some magical formula, some sci-
148 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
entific certainty that makes success in business predictable and fail-safe. Non-
sense. There is much value in the average college curriculum, but it is mostly
theory. A college degree is the beginning of the journey, not the end. A diploma
is only a way of qualifying yourself for a position on a team in the real world
where you will work for money.
It is no mistake that the metaphor of war is so often chosen to describe the
dynamics of business. Once graduation is over, every student must meet the
competition on the corporate battlefield. Out there, no one is taken prisoner.
Economically speaking, everyone lives or dies by his own ability to recognize
the opportunity, strategize the attack, and execute the plan under the ever-
changing conditions of battle. When I started the company National Note in
December of 1992, my vision for it was very different than it is today. I originally
intended to broker notes to institutional buyers for a commission. That put me
squarely in the “S” corner of the Rich Dad CASHFLOW Quadrant. I soon found
that many institutional note buyers were often too subjective and sometimes
even fickle, I tired of seeing perfectly good proposals turned down for reasons
that seemed capricious to me.
With IRA funds of my own and limited money from family, friends, and
clients I had known for years, I started buying the notes myself with private
capital. I soon realized that I was building assets and equity in my company at a
rather rapid rate. My balance sheet was improving dramatically from year-to-
year. It wasn’t until I read Robert Kiyosaki’s book, The CASHFLOW Quadrant,
that I realized I had become an investor (“I” quadrant), instead of merely self-
employed (“S” quadrant).
Years later, while teaching a seminar with Robert, I was stunned to learn
that the rapid growth of my company was primarily because I had inadvertently
managed to structure it in harmony with the Rich Dad philosophy. Not being
sophisticated in any sense of the word, I simply kept my head down and focused
on managing my business as best I knew how. Others came to me with various
ideas and wanted to be part of National Note. Rather than share equity, I joint-
ventured new business opportunities with a few of the best people. These en-
terprises, funded by National Note, prospered because of my partners’ talents
and National Note’s capital. I split profits with my partners at pre-agreed per-
centages, as the companies grow and prosper.
Somewhere along the way, something phenomenal started to happen. Those
to whom we had been faithfully sending checks each month, with never a delin-
quency, began to tell their family and friends about us. Our business has grown
every year for the past sixteen years and is ten times larger today than it was
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 149
four years ago. We simply “stuck to our knitting,” as the saying goes, and man-
aged the company in such a way as to make it stronger and stronger to assure
the safety of the capital entrusted to us.
What is the key to such growth? The very principles I am sharing with you
now. By focusing on acquiring quality assets, running our business, telling the
truth, making the required disclosures, under-promising, and over-performing,
capital continues to be available to our companies.
From among the people who do business with us today, there are dozens of
inspiring personal stories of how debts were liquidated, stock market losses re-
covered, retirements funded, tuition paid, and moms who quit work to stay at
home with their babies. These private victories were possible because of the
careful deployment of their capital in real estate and real estate paper. For me,
seeing our clients achieve such milestones is the most rewarding aspect of being
a capitalist.
There is no way I could have known when I was ten years old how important
that white marble would become to me. I trust you now understand why I keep
a jar of marbles in my office. Growing a business does not need to be difficult or
highly technical. By gaining some proficiency in the practice of capitalism, just
like learning to shoot marbles, you, too, can build a machine that will crank out
profits for you and those who are fortunate enough to be in business with you.
There is no need to gamble or speculate, as so many do when investing. Find
a simple system that works, and work it! Attend to your game of marbles. Pick
your matches (investments) carefully, and celebrate as treasure fills first a bag,
then a barrel, and perhaps even a bank vault. I am astonished at how far our
companies have come. What a fabulous experience it is to be a capitalist! What
a ride it has been! What a joy it is to look back and relish the journey and to
look ahead with eager anticipation of an exciting future!
Now, could it be your turn? Where will you find your “taw”? When will you
enter your first game? How long will it take you to acquire more marbles than
you ever dreamed possible? Those questions are yours to answer, and the jour-
ney ahead is yours to begin. Good luck!
Ways to Learn More
www.waynelpalmer.com
www.nce1031.com
A soon-to-be published book on real estate formulas, by Wayne Palmer
150 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Wayne Palmer is widely regarded as a master in the creative structuring
of real estate acquisitions and financing, using notes and other forms of
real estate paper, together with 1031 Equity Marketing formulas. His skills
come from thirty years of daily practice of his trade, as the owner and
manager of National Note of Utah, LC and several other companies. He
has been involved in real estate development since 1978, in Utah, Idaho,
Arizona, Hawai’i, and Minnesota. By way of industry credentials, Wayne is a Licensed Princi-
pal Real Estate Broker, a Certified Real Estate Note Appraiser, a Certified Cash Flow Master
Broker, a Licensed Continuing Education Provider, and holds the Equity Marketing Specialist
(EMS) designation with the National Council of Exchangors.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 151
Bernie Bays has been a friend of mine since the mid-1970s. He is also a fellow
marine and rugby team member. If you go over his record, you can tell he is
no ordinary marine, but a Force Recon Marine, the toughest of the tough. He is
also no ordinary rugby player, playing for USC and for Stanford University on a
national championship team. Small wonder he is such a smart and respected real
estate attorney.
When I first started out in real estate, my deals were small, and I thought I did
not need an attorney. Being naïve, I thought a real estate broker and a good ap-
praiser were enough. On my first investment property—a small one bedroom, one
bath condo on the island of Maui—my little dream bubble was popped. A few
months after acquiring the property and putting a tenant in it, netting me a whop-
ping $25 a month, the septic system in the condominium complex burst and flooded
the apartment. The apartment went empty, I began to lose money, the homeowners
told me the septic damage to my unit was my problem, not theirs. My first asset
became a liability, and I learned a priceless but expensive lesson about real estate.
Hire an attorney before you invest, not after.
Real estate is more than dirt, sticks, bricks, financing, and tenants. Real estate
is also law, agreements, boundaries, and disputes. This is why Bernie Bays is not
only a friend; he is the real estate attorney I call before investing in Hawai’i.
—Robert Kiyosaki
8 Bernie BAYS
How to Avoid and Handle
Real Estate Disputes
152
O ne unfortunate reality of real estate deals today is that there is always the
possibility that you can become involved in a dispute with other partici-
pants during the making of the deal. These participants can include sellers,
lenders, construction and planning professionals, construction contractors,
and buyers. Success in real estate means not only being great at picking prop-
erties, managing them well, and eventually selling at the right time, it also
means knowing how to minimize the risk of becoming involved in a protracted
dispute.
I have been representing clients involved in real estate–related disputes for
more than thirty-eight years. During that time, I have observed that some par-
ticipants in real estate deals are constantly involved in disputes. Others rarely
get into disputes and when they do, they usually manage to resolve them rela-
tively quickly. What’s the difference between these two groups of people: the
ones who seem to get into dispute after dispute and the ones who seldom do?
How can you minimize your chances of being involved in a dispute?
Make no mistake about it. Disputes in real estate deals can spoil your party
by diverting time, money, other resources, and, most importantly, emotional
energy from what you are trying to achieve: a successful real estate deal. There
are admittedly a few perverse individuals who occasionally come out ahead by
picking fights in a real estate deal. And there are a few people who thrive on
the negative emotional energy of disputes, even though they may not really
come out ahead. You want to avoid these people in your real estate deals. But
it’s not always about the people. Sometimes it’s the kind of real estate deals
that are prone to disputes and you want to avoid those as well.
Disputes in real estate deals can spoil your party by diverting time,
money, other resources, and, most importantly, emotional energy from what
you are trying to achieve: a successful real estate deal.
My objective here is to give you some simple guidelines so you can reduce
your chances of becoming involved in a real estate dispute. I also want to give
you some suggestions for how best to handle the disputes that you cannot avoid.
How to Avoid Disputes
The best defense against a dispute is to avoid the dispute altogether. Here’s my
list of how to keep yourself out of trouble.
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 153
Work With a Good, Experienced Broker
Always work with your own real estate broker on a real estate deal. Do not just
work with the seller’s real estate broker when you are buying a property. You
want to select a broker who has the experience and good sense to look out for
your interests rather than simply pushing you to close the deal at hand in order
to get a commission. You want a broker who is in it for the long term and knows
that there will be other deals to do with you if this one does not work out. You
want a trusted broker who will advise you to walk away from the deal if that is
the best thing for you to do under the circumstances.
I recently concluded a case for a client who had purchased a development
property through the listing broker without using his own broker. My client
initially told the broker that he could not buy the property because of the three-
unit affordable housing requirement. The broker told my client that if my client
would sell him three of the lots in the proposed subdivision at a reduced price,
he would construct the affordable housing on the three lots and satisfy the re-
quirement. My client allowed the broker’s lawyer to draft the agreement re-
garding the three lots and proceeded with the purchase of the property. He did
not have his own lawyer review the agreement, but instead just trusted the
seller’s broker. After my client purchased the property, he discovered that the
affordable housing requirement for the project was actually five units, not three.
Even more shocking, the broker said that he was not obligated to build any af-
fordable housing at the site. “That was just something we discussed that I might
do if it worked out,” the broker said.
The broker then demanded that my client convey the three lots to him at the
reduced price and threatened to sue. When my client came to me, we discovered
that the agreement drafted by the broker’s attorney provided for a sale of the
lots to the broker at a reduced price, but said nothing about building the afford-
able housing.
My client did not have a legal leg to stand on. We were finally able to settle
the case by conveying only two of the three lots to the broker. My client was
left to satisfy the five-unit affordable housing requirement on his other lots.
This case demonstrates how dangerous it is not to have your own broker repre-
senting you in a real estate transaction. It also demonstrates how dangerous it
is not to have your own lawyer representing you in documenting your agree-
ments, which is what the next section is about.
Do not just work with the seller’s real estate broker when you are buying
a property. You want a trusted broker who will advise you to walk away from the
deal if that is the best thing for you to do.
TIP
154 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Consult with a Good, Experienced Lawyer Early and Often
I was giving a speech a few months ago to a group of real estate developers and
joked that in real estate deals you should get a lawyer involved “early and often.”
I was joking, but there is a good deal of truth in what I said. The truth here is
that an ounce of prevention in lawyer time spent drafting the deal contracts is
worth a pound of cure in the form of costly litigation. So spend a little money
on lawyers in the beginning to get clear contracts that protect your interests. It
may save you a fortune in litigation costs later on. These are my suggestions to
get the most value from your lawyer in a real estate deal:
• Find an experienced real estate attorney you trust and can afford.
• Keep him or her up to speed on pending transactions and request advice
early and often.
• Specifically, have your lawyer involved in the preparation of any term sheets
or letters of intent, even though they may be nonbinding. This is usually
when the buyer and the seller agree upon important deal points that are dif-
ficult to change later on.
• Have your lawyer prepare any binding contracts.
• Do not try to save money by allowing the lawyer on the other side to prepare
the first draft of the contracts. It is better to spend the money to have your
lawyer prepare the first draft. It is often difficult to change a contract drafted
by the other side. Once they have prepared and approved it, they tend to be-
come wedded to it.
• Involve your lawyer in your due diligence process for any property you are
buying. Skimping on legal due diligence to save money is a bad idea, a false
economy. If a property is worth putting under contract, then it is worth
spending the money on a thorough due diligence including legal.
The truth here is that an ounce of prevention in lawyer time spent draft-
ing the deal contracts is worth a pound of cure in the form of costly litigation.
Insist on Clear Contracts that Protect Your Interests
I handle real estate litigation that results when real estate deals go bad. Often
these cases result from poorly drafted contracts that do not do a good job of
protecting the legitimate interests of the parties. For example, I have had two
cases in the last year or so where, believe it or not, the contracts really did not
require one of the parties to follow through on his commitments to complete
the real estate projects that were the subject of those contracts. Clearly the in-
tent of the parties was to execute contracts that were binding, but the contracts
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 155
156 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
they signed did not effectively do the job. In one case, the party financing the
development just refused to proceed with the project, even though the market
was good and the project would have been profitable. Unfortunately, the con-
tracts did not explicitly require the investor to proceed. The developers had al-
lowed the investor’s lawyer to prepare the agreements without hiring their own
lawyer, which turned out to be a very costly mistake.
In the other case, the investors gave the developer the money he said he
needed to complete the development. Unfortunately the contracts did not really
obligate him to finish the project, and the contracts also prevented the investors
from replacing the developer, even if he completely failed to finish the project.
The lesson here is to insist on clear contracts that obligate the parties to do
what they have agreed to do and to have a lawyer represent you who is looking
out for your interests and protecting your rights.
You are entitled to contracts that spell out precisely what you expect to hap-
pen in the real estate deal; contracts that reduce the uncertainty and keep am-
biguity to a minimum. You also want to make absolutely sure the other parties
are required to do exactly what you expect them to do when you expect them
to do it. Spell out the consequences if the other parties do not do what you ex-
pect them to do. By the same token, you also want to know what the conse-
quences will be if you do not or cannot uphold your side of the agreement. A
good lawyer can help you define and limit your downside as much as possible
in those situations. Later we’ll talk about limiting remedies in more detail, but
here’s some legal advice: If you are not sure you can perform under the terms
of the contract, then you should not sign it.
Beyond these words of wisdom, take the time to read and understand the
contracts you are going to sign. In doing so, your real estate broker and your
lawyer can give you all the help you need. Let them help you identify any risks
that others will not perform or that you cannot perform, and make the necessary
changes to fix the problems. Don’t hesitate to have things explained again if
you do not understand. And don’t worry about looking stupid. The more you
understand, the smarter you will get. The stupid thing is to sign a contract you
really do not understand.
You are entitled to contracts that spell out precisely what you expect
to happen in the real estate deal; contracts that reduce the uncertainty and
keep ambiguity to a minimum. You also want to make absolutely sure the
other parties are required to do exactly what you expect them to do when
you expect them to do it.
TIP
Carefully Specify and Limit Remedies in the Contract
Much of the uncertainty regarding real estate contracts can be eliminated by
clearly specifying remedies. For example, real estate contracts often provide
that the seller’s only remedy if the buyer defaults is to keep the buyer’s deposit.
On the other hand, if you are a seller, you want to limit the buyer’s remedy to
just getting the deposit back and you want to specifically preclude the buyer
from getting what is called “specific performance.”
“Specific performance” is an equitable remedy that gives the buyer the right
to legally compel the seller to sell the property to the buyer upon the terms in
the contract. If the buyer is arguably entitled to specific performance, the buyer
may have the ability to tie up the seller’s property in court for years while the
parties litigate their respective obligations under the contract and who did
what. This could effectively give the buyer an option on the seller’s property
for years with only the deposit at risk. This is not where you want to be if you
are a seller. If you cannot completely negotiate out specific performance, you
want to limit the situations where the buyer is entitled to seek specific per-
formance as much as possible.
“Specific performance” is an equitable remedy that gives the buyer
the right to legally compel the seller to sell the property to the buyer upon
the terms in the contract. As a seller, if you cannot completely negotiate out
specific performance, you want to limit it as much as possible.
Let me share with you a story of how powerful specific performance can be.
I represented a large hotel chain in litigation that resulted from the failed sale
of a trophy resort hotel in Honolulu. The buyer had failed to perform according
to the exact terms of the contract, so my client finally canceled the deal and
kept the buyer’s $1 million deposit. The buyer had also spent more than
$200,000 on a lengthy due diligence before my client canceled the contract.
Had I been involved earlier, I would have recommended that my client give the
buyer more time to perform and would have carefully positioned the buyer be-
fore canceling. But by the time the case got to me, the contract had been can-
celed, and the buyer had sued. We asked the court for summary judgment
without a trial based upon the fact that the buyer had not met the time deadlines
provided for in the contract. We got lucky and the federal court gave us sum-
mary judgment against the buyer.
After the hearing, I advised the top management of the hotel chain that we
had been very lucky to get summary judgment, and that the court’s decision
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 157
might be reversed on appeal. I told them that they did not want a premier hotel
tied up for years by the buyer’s potential right to specific performance while
the appeal got resolved. I recommended that they use this opportunity to settle
with the buyer by returning some of the deposit. But warmed by the glow of
victory, they refused to offer the buyer anything, and I was reprimanded by a
senior partner for spoiling our victory with my dismal predictions about an
appeal.
To make a long story short, I left the firm with some of my colleagues to
form our own firm, and someone else handled the appeal. Years later, after the
hotel had increased 50 percent in value, the appeals court ruled that the buyer
should be allowed to proceed with the purchase of the hotel at the original
price with full credit for the deposit the seller had retained.
Here are some words of experience:
• Limit the buyer’s right to specific performance whenever possible
• Always try to resolve the dispute instead of rolling the dice in litigation
In that case, the seller’s failure to limit specific performance and insistence
on keeping the buyer’s $1 million tied up a premier hotel for years and resulted
in the sale of an $80 million hotel for $55 million. Not a good outcome!
Avoid Problem People
Do not do real estate deals with people who are likely to be trouble down the
road. Some people get into disputes with everyone. You want to do online liti-
gation checks on people you are considering doing business with. If they have
been involved in a lot of litigation you want to avoid them. This is also another
good reason for you to avoid litigation; so that other people will not avoid doing
business with you! Conversely, you want to do business with people who have
a history and reputation for working things out when a real estate deal hits a
rough spot. You want to have a mutual trust and respect for the other people
involved in a real estate deal whenever possible, especially a real estate devel-
opment project that will go on for several years.
Do online litigation checks on people you are considering doing
business with. Avoid litigation so people will do business with you!
Rough spots are sure to come up, and potential disagreements are certain to
arise. You want to be involved with people who will work them out with you,
TIP
TIP
158 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
not make a mountain out of every molehill. The last thing you want is someone
who will blow up your deal in litigation to prove they are right.
Avoid Problem Deals
Some deals are just more trouble than they are worth. Some deals get more
complicated, involved, and difficult as they progress. And the more complicated
and difficult the deal becomes, the more likely there are to be disputes later on
that will be difficult to resolve. So when the deal gets more and more difficult
and the brain damage mounts, you need to ask: Is it worth it? Is this deal so
good and so beneficial for you that it is worth the brain damage and risk that is
inherent in complex, difficult deals? Some are worth it, and you may want to
continue. Most are not, and you will be better off letting those go. Let someone
else deal with all the headaches and problems if the potential benefit to you is
really not worth the trouble. If the benefit is there and you decide to go ahead,
then the help of a good lawyer and the need for clear contracts become doubly
important. However, even a good lawyer can do only so much to overcome the
risks inherent in a difficult deal.
The more complicated and difficult the deal becomes, the more likely
there are to be disputes later on—and problem people and problem deals often
go hand in hand.
The purchase of a large ranch that I helped a friend put together several
years ago was a deal that was just too difficult and complicated. A limited part-
nership owned the ranch and the general partner who originally formed the
group that owned the ranch had sold his interest to a stranger who had gotten
into litigation with the holder of the grazing license. In order to buy the ranch,
my friend had to put together another partnership composed of some of the
partners in the original partnership that owned the ranch and some new in-
vestor partners. We also had to get a federal farm loan, renegotiate the under-
lying ground lease to extend it to twenty-five years, settle the litigation between
the general partner and the licensee, and resolve the disagreements among
everyone as to how all this should be done. I was the person responsible for do-
ing all of this. As I look back, the brain damage, work, and stress involved in
trying to put this extremely complicated deal together clearly outweighed any
gain. The deal finally collapsed of its own weight when the buyer went on a
long-planned, month-long family vacation when the deal was supposed to close.
Luckily, no one involved got sued; we just wasted a lot of time and money on a
deal that was just too difficult and complicated.
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 159
Another point to consider is that problem people and problem deals often
go hand in hand. Clear contracts can go only so far in controlling problem people
in the context of a problem deal. The probability of serious disputes that will
be difficult, if not impossible to resolve without litigation goes up exponentially.
Some experienced real estate developers and investors would say that no deal
is worth going through the brain damage, emotional drain, and risk of problem
people and problem deals and would advise you to just walk away from them. I
will just say that the problems will be more numerous and much worse than
you expect so you need to be sure the deal is really worth it. A few deals are
that good, but the vast majority are simply not worth it.
Do a Thorough Due Diligence, Including Legal Due Diligence
Due diligence is a period of time designated within a contract that allows a
buyer to check out the property and the deal before committing to close. Usually
the buyer’s deposits are refundable until the buyer notifies the seller that the
property and the deal are acceptable. At that point, the buyer’s deposit “goes
hard” (becomes nonrefundable) and the buyer is also usually required to in-
crease the deposit so that the buyer will lose a substantial amount of money if
the buyer fails to close. This nonrefundable deposit also gives the seller comfort
that the deal will close.
If you are a buyer and you think a deal is worth doing, then it is worth
spending the money to do a thorough due diligence, including careful legal
due diligence.
If you are a buyer and you think a deal is worth doing, then it is worth spend-
ing the money to do a thorough due diligence, including careful legal due dili-
gence. If the deal is big, then you need to spend a substantial amount of money
to check it out carefully before you agree to close. Many disputes can be
avoided if you check out the property and the deal very carefully before you
commit to close. If you discover problems or issues at the due diligence stage,
you can insist that the contract be amended to fairly deal with the problems
you have discovered. If you need more time to complete your due diligence,
show the seller the effort you are making and the money you are spending on
the deal and ask for an extension of time. You will usually get it if the seller is
convinced you are proceeding in good faith. But sometimes the seller won’t
feel that way.
TIP
160 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
I recently had a development property in escrow and delayed the legal due
diligence to save money. I instead focused a lot of time and money on planning
the proposed subdivision and locating an adequate water source for the prop-
erty. When I finally started the legal due diligence, my lawyers discovered an
unusual legal restriction that prevented us from developing the subdivision
project we had planned for the property. As a result, all the money we had spent
on engineering and land planning was completely wasted.
How to Avoid Real Estate Disputes
Avoid disputes in your real estate deals by doing the following:
• Work with a good, experienced broker.
• Consult with a good, experienced lawyer early and often.
• Insist on clear contracts that protect your interests.
• Carefully specify and limit remedies in the contract.
• Avoid problem people.
• Avoid problem deals.
• Do a thorough due diligence, including legal due diligence.
How to Handle Real Estate Disputes
Even if you follow the steps I have outlined above, no contract is perfect, and
conditions may change in ways that may make the deal more difficult for one
or more of the parties. As a result, disputes can arise, even when you have clear
contracts with decent people: One party may also just want to try to improve
the deal after it is agreed upon. So how do you handle the disagreements that
do arise in your real estate deals? The simple answer is that you should always
do your best to work it out. In doing this, you may want to consider the following
suggestions:
Consult with a Good, Experienced Litigation
Lawyer to Avoid Litigation
Strangely enough, a good litigation lawyer knows better than anyone that liti-
gation in real estate deals seldom pays off and also knows the best ways to avoid
it. While helping you avoid litigation, an experienced litigation lawyer can also
put you in the best position possible if litigation cannot be avoided. He or she
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 161
can also make sure you do not give up the farm or get bullied by the other par-
ties. There is usually some middle ground between getting pushed around and
doing your part to resolve disagreements. A good lawyer can help you find that
middle ground.
But here is a fair warning. Litigation lawyers make a lot more money by rep-
resenting you in litigation than they do in helping you avoid it. Some do not
have enough work and may have a financial self interest in prolonging your dis-
pute, or even aggravating it. Some lawyers also are just enamored with the liti-
gation process and get carried away with protecting your position to the point
they lose sight of the real objective, which is resolving the dispute for you as
quickly and cheaply as possible. You do not want these unbalanced lawyers rep-
resenting you. You want lawyers helping you who have the experience and good
judgment to strike the right balance between protecting your interests and re-
solving your dispute.
Experience warning: Litigation lawyers make a lot more money by repre-
senting you in litigation than they do in helping you avoid it. Choose carefully.
When Disputes Arise, Do Whatever You Can to Work It Out
As I have said, disagreements may occur in real estate deals, even though you
have had clear contracts prepared by a good lawyer. Generally, the more com-
plicated the deal and the longer it lasts, the more likely there are to be disagree-
ments. For example, a joint venture agreement to develop a planned community
over a ten- to twenty-year period is almost certain to involve a number of dis-
agreements, while the sale of a house in “as is condition” for cash to close in
thirty days is much less likely to generate disagreements.
My advice is when disagreements arise, you should do your best to work out
the disagreements as soon as possible. This can usually be done by respecting
the other party’s interests while protecting your own. There is no need to force
the other party to live up to the letter of the contract if you can accommodate
their legitimate interests without hurting yourself. You are almost always better
off giving up a little ground, generating some good will, and resolving the dis-
agreement before it becomes a serious dispute. Here are some suggestions:
• Respect the legitimate interests of the other party, and try to accommodate
them whenever you can. There is usually a way to respect the other party’s
interests while protecting your own. For example, if you are selling a prop-
TIP
162 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
erty, and the buyer wants to extend due diligence for thirty days, figure out a
way to do it, maybe by getting a cash payment. This point is demonstrated
by a case I handled several years ago for a very wealthy client whose name
some of you would recognize. He was buying a large oceanfront resort prop-
erty for development, and the seller refused to extend the time for due dili-
gence in a situation where it was reasonable to do so. The seller’s refusal to
extend due diligence and abrupt cancellation of the sale precipitated a law-
suit by my client that tied up the seller’s property for years and eventually
led the seller to sell the property to my client for about $2 million less than
the contract price, even though the real estate market had gone up. All this
could have been avoided if the seller had just given my client a thirty-day ex-
tension for due diligence.
• Generate clear correspondence to the other side with the help of your lawyer.
This will often help avoid litigation and, if not, this correspondence will be
valuable evidence for you in any litigation.
• You can usually make substantial concessions to resolve disputes and avoid
litigation and still come out way ahead. The cost of litigation is always higher
than you expect. The case always costs more than you expect and there are
hidden costs. The emotional cost of litigation can be overwhelming for many
people and the lost time, energy, and opportunities can also be huge and may
be more expensive than the direct costs of the lawyers and experts who par-
ticipate in the case. The adage “avoid litigation at all costs” is only slightly
off the mark.
You are almost always better off giving up a little ground, generating
some good will and resolving the disagreement before it becomes a serious
dispute.
Try Mediation
When you have tried your best and have been unable to settle the dispute di-
rectly with the other party, you may want to try mediation. Mediation is an ab-
breviated dispute resolution process where an experienced professional helps
the parties reach a voluntary settlement of their dispute.
A number of years ago when mediation was first used, it had a very high suc-
cess rate, between 80 and 90 percent. In recent years, the success rate is much
lower. Today, the mediation process is only as good as the mediator. Highly
skilled, experienced mediators still maintain a high success ratio while less
skilled mediators probably succeed in less than half their attempts. Mediation
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 163
164 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
can work when you select the right mediator, and that is probably the most im-
portant factor in a successful mediation.
The second most important factor is a mutual desire by the parties to resolve
the dispute in the mediation. Mediations used to take place in one day, but today
a good mediator may work for as long as one or two months, going back and
forth with the parties to resolve a dispute. A good mediator will put in whatever
effort it takes to succeed. I was the mediator appointed by the court to resolve
a series of interrelated cases that were estimated to use up one year of court
time if they were not settled. That mediation lasted several months before I
succeeded, but it saved a fortune in lawyers’ fees and court time. It was well
worth the effort I put into it.
Mediation can work when you select the right mediator and when there
is a mutual desire by the parties to resolve the dispute.
Another way to improve the odds for success in mediation is to begin the
process with a comprehensive settlement offer that includes all the details of a
settlement. You then want to insist that the negotiation of major terms take
place within the context of this comprehensive agreement so you will know
exactly what you are agreeing to.
Mediation is relatively inexpensive if it is successful and is much better than
any other method of formal dispute resolution. However, if it is unsuccessful,
then nothing has been accomplished, and the mediation will have been a waste
of time and money. Because mediation can be so efficient and effective, many
real estate contracts require mediation before arbitration or litigation. I rec-
ommend that you include a provision requiring mediation in most contracts.
Several years ago, I represented a client in a case that seemed ripe for medi-
ation. The parties decided to pay a blue ribbon mediator $10,000 for one day,
and we all flew to San Francisco to have him mediate the case. Although the
mediator was very experienced and had a good reputation, he completely
screwed up this mediation and failed to get any concrete settlement offer out
of the other side. My client was so anxious to resolve the case that he made re-
peatedly lower offers to the other side without any counter offer, all contrary
to the instructions his business advisor and I gave him repeatedly. The client
negotiated against himself throughout the day and reduced his settlement offer
from $500,000 (which was a fair deal for the other side) down to something
substantially under $100,000, which the arrogant folks on the other side should
have jumped at.
TIP
The case finally settled years later when the vice president of the real estate
title insurance company (who was himself an attorney) called me directly and
said we had to settle the case right then. He said that he could no longer take
the amount the case was costing. He indicated his lawyer’s fees had already ex-
ceeded $1 million with no end in sight. I recalled that his attorney had bragged
after an earlier hearing in the case that he had “bought a new car” with the fees
from the case. The title company finally agreed to pay my client $850,000 in
cash to settle a case that could have been settled at the outset for less than
$100,000 in the mediation. I estimate the total cost to the title company was
well over $2 million, all because it did not accept my client’s offer in the medi-
ation. You should avoid making this mistake!
Consider Arbitration
If settlement fails and mediation fails, you may want to consider arbitration as
an alternative to litigation in court. Arbitration is a trial conducted by an expe-
rienced arbitrator paid by the parties instead of a judge or jury who are paid by
the federal or state government. Many real estate contracts require arbitration
instead of litigation. Where the contract requires arbitration, then the parties
are required to resolve the dispute by arbitration, and any court litigation initi-
ated by either party based upon the contract will be dismissed by the court in
favor of arbitration under the terms of the contract.
The arbitrator hears the evidence and makes a binding and final decision
based upon the evidence and the law. Your ability to appeal a bad decision made
by an arbitrator is very limited. Arbitration used to be quicker and cheaper than
litigation, but today it is unclear whether there is any net benefit to arbitration
over litigation. Because the arbitrator is getting paid and a refusal to hear all
evidence may be grounds to upset the arbitration decision, arbitrations can tend
to go on forever, can become more expensive than litigation, and may not get
the case resolved any quicker.
The quality of arbitrators can also vary greatly with some having difficulty
deciding cases correctly. Because the benefits of arbitration are unclear, the trend
toward requiring arbitration instead of litigation in real estate contracts has been
curtailed to some extent. The arbitration requirement has now been deleted
from some real estate contracts in favor of traditional court litigation. For exam-
ple, the standard real estate “Purchase Contract” used by real estate agents in
Hawai’i was recently revised to delete the mandatory arbitration requirement.
To me, arbitration and litigation are now a toss up with no clear-cut advan-
tage to either. If your case is assigned to a good judge that your attorney has
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 165
confidence in then you should stick with the judge. On the other hand, if your
case is assigned to a poor judge and you can agree with the other side on a good
arbitrator, then you may want to opt for arbitration. For example, both sides in
a court case I handled recently agreed to arbitration instead of going through
the litigation process. We selected a very experienced retired judge as the arbi-
trator, and my client just received a very fair award that the other side has paid
in full. In that case, the arbitration was completed promptly and worked out
very well for my client.
Arbitrations can tend to go on forever, become more expensive than
litigation, and may not get the case resolved any quicker. Because the benefits
of arbitration are unclear, the trend toward requiring arbitration instead of
litigation in real estate contracts has been curtailed somewhat.
Litigation Is Your Last Resort
If you are unable to resolve the dispute by negotiation or mediation and your
contract does not require arbitration, then you are left with litigation. As I said
earlier, litigation can be very expensive and emotionally draining. The direct
cost—meaning cash—can be very high, and the indirect costs in terms of wasted
time and emotional energy can be even higher. But there are also opportunities
to resolve the dispute. The court will usually agree upon a request by either
party to conduct settlement conferences in an effort to resolve the case early
and without the expense of a trial. The court may also appoint a mediator to
help settle the case. In my experience, a court-appointed mediator has a better
chance of success than one without court backing.
In one case where I was acting as a court-appointed mediator, several of the
parties were not even paying their own lawyers or returning their phone calls,
much less contributing to a settlement of the case. Because I had been appointed
by the court, I was able to get the presidents of those large companies on the
phone and get their attention with some direct talk, and eventually I got their
cooperation in contributing to a global settlement of a number of complicated
interrelated cases.
There may also be opportunities to file motions to decide or limit issues in
advance of the trial. However, generally things are not going well if you are em-
broiled in the litigation process. If you end up there, then you are left with no
alternative but to do your best to win with the understanding that it will be
very expensive.
A case earlier in my career demonstrates the financial and emotional toll
that litigation can take. I recall sitting at the counsel table in court in the morn-
TIP
166 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ing waiting for the trial to resume. The man on the opposing side was sitting at
his table, waiting for his lawyer to arrive. I could not help feeling sorry for him;
he looked so dejected. His lawyer had refused to settle the case, and he had
been forced to go into this trial that was not going well for him. Things took a
turn for the worse when the sheriff came in and served him with a complaint
in a separate case that had been filed against him by his own lawyer to collect
the fees he was owed. This caused a great deal of dissention between the client
and his lawyer who arrived a few minutes later. The dissention lasted through
the rest of the trial and probably contributed to the large monetary award the
court made against this poor individual. Leaving aside the ethical problems
with his lawyer, this graphically demonstrates the emotional and financial cost
of litigation.
The direct cost—meaning cash—of litigation can be very high,
and the indirect costs in terms of wasted time and emotional energy
can be even higher.
Never Quit Trying to Resolve the Dispute
No Matter Where You Are in the Process
Always keep in mind that mediation, arbitration, and litigation are only means
to an end: resolving a dispute. No matter where you stand in these processes,
you should never quit trying to resolve the case on some basis you can live with.
Never quit trying to work things out with the other side. Also never hesitate to
take the initiative in trying to settle. Don’t worry too much about appearing
weak because you have taken the initiative. Only a fool would not want to settle
a case if it is at all possible. The other side is probably not having any more fun
than you are, and as both sides get progressively more fed up with the time and
expense of litigation, they may be more willing to settle. So never stop trying to
come up with alternative ways to resolve the dispute.
Don’t worry too much about appearing weak because you have
taken the initiative to settle. Only a fool would not want to settle a case
if it is at all possible.
Several years ago I represented the developer of the only large, new oceanfront
hotel developed in Waikiki over the past twenty years. The owners and residents
of the condominium apartment building across the street had opposed his project
from the beginning through their association of apartment owners. They had
contested the shoreline permit required for any oceanfront development in
TIP
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 167
Hawai’i and had appealed the granting of that permit all the way through the
court system. They also contested a number of zoning variances that the devel-
oper required for the construction of the hotel. To say that my client had a great
deal of animosity toward these people would be an understatement.
I filed a motion in the case to have the variances upheld as a matter of law so
that my client could proceed with the construction of the hotel. The argument
before the judge went very well. We were well organized and made a clear,
compelling presentation using visual aids, while our opposition made a sloppy,
disjointed presentation. The judge also appeared receptive to our arguments.
To observers in the courtroom, including my client, it looked like we were sure
to win. I told my client after the hearing that I thought the judge’s positive re-
action was because of my favorable relationship with him, and that my intuition
was telling me that we were going to lose the motion and the variances that
would sabotage his plans for the hotel. My client was not buying it. He was at
the hearing, and he was confident we were going to win.
Nevertheless, I started negotiations with the lawyer on the other side for my
client to make a cash payment to the condo association in exchange for dropping
its opposition to the variances. The association finally agreed to accept $150,000
to drop the case. My client refused, even though this case could sabotage his
$100 million hotel project if he lost. He was also infuriated with me for wasting
time and showing weakness by negotiating with his enemies. He told me to stop
dealing with them and just wait for the judge’s favorable decision. I got the judge
to postpone his decision and continued to negotiate a reduced amount with the
association. The client also rejected that offer and threatened to fire me. I con-
tinued to negotiate. Finally, the association agreed to accept $55,000 to settle
the case. My client was very angry with me, but I kept calling and recommending
that he accept the offer. I pointed out how small the amount was and how much
was at stake. He told me never to call again about the offer. I continued to call.
He again threatened to fire me. I did not let up, and he finally agreed to accept
the offer and paid the $55,000 to settle the case. My client considered it a com-
plete waste of money since he was confident he was going to win.
I went to see the judge after the case was settled, and he told me that he
thought all the variances were wrong and that he was going to strike down all
of them. Shortly after we settled the case on the variances, we won the appeal
on the shoreline permit, and my client was able to proceed with what is now a
beautiful oceanfront hotel owned and operated by another one of my clients.
So this story had a happy and profitable ending, which is your goal in all real
168 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
estate deals. The moral here is this: Keep trying to settle, and never take the
risk of an adverse court decision if you can avoid it.
So, don’t reconcile yourself to trudge down the path of seemingly endless
acrimony in litigation if you can get a resolution you can live with. You are al-
most always better off settling than you will be by taking the risk of an uncertain
outcome in litigation. Because of the complication of real estate deals and the
limited remedies that can be provided by the court, in many situations a settle-
ment is often a much better resolution for both parties than litigation, even for
the “winner.” In short, you may not be able to get what you really need from a
court decision, even if you win.
How to Resolve Real Estate Disputes
Try to resolve the disputes you cannot avoid by doing the following:
• Consult with an experienced litigation lawyer to avoid litigation.
• When disputes arise, do whatever you can to work it out.
• Try mediation.
• Consider arbitration.
• Litigation is your last resort.
• Never stop trying to resolve the dispute no matter where you are in this process.
Conclusion
You are almost always better off settling your disputes in a reasonable, fair way
that respects the interests of the other parties while protecting your own than
you are having the dispute decided by an arbitrator, a judge, or a jury. And most
of all, the best solution is to avoid disputes altogether by going into the right
real estate projects, with the right people, the right mind-set, the right contracts,
and the right legal representation.
Bernie Bays is a partner in Bays, Deaver, Lung, Rose & Holma, a boutique
real estate firm based in Honolulu, Hawai’i, and is one of the few attorneys
in Hawai’i who is board certified as a civil trial specialist by the National
Board of Trial Advocacy and the Hawai’i Supreme Court. During his thirty-
eight year career, Bernie has represented clients in landmark real estate
cases before the Hawai’i Intermediate Court, the Hawai’i Supreme Court,
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 169
and the U.S. Supreme Court. His experience encompasses a broad range of business and
real estate cases, including the representation of minority and majority shareholders, cor-
porate proxy fights, antitrust representation of both plaintiffs and defendants, as well as lit-
igation concerning real estate sales, commercial leases, land use problems, rent
renegotiations, claims for economic loss and lost profit, property damage, general and lim-
ited partner disputes, condominium and subdivision problems, land valuation issues, and
condemnation.
170 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
PART 2
Your Real Estate
Project
• MEL SHULTZ
• CURTIS OAKES
• JOHN FINNEY
• SCOTT MCPHERSON
• KIM DALTON
• CRAIG COPPOLA
• KEN MCELROY
This page intentionally left blank
Mel is my neighbor. We met at a neighborhood holiday party. I liked him im-
mediately because he is a real estate developer and was a longtime owner
of two professional sports teams. There is nothing like sitting in the owner’s seat
at a Phoenix Suns basketball game. The players, cheerleaders, and the action are
much more intense at the court level. Usually I sit higher up and need to use binoc-
ulars to see the game.
One of the advantages of having a friend like Mel is that I get to find out where
the next growth areas are going to be. Being a land developer, he is operating three-
to-ten years out into the future. Not only do his developments expand the city,
Mel and his high-profile team are responsible for bringing new life back into down-
town urban areas.
Mel is a great neighbor, friend, and a real estate visionary. Whenever I want to
know about the future and where to invest, I call Mel Shultz.
—Robert Kiyosaki
H ave you ever been driving around your city or town and passed by an
open field and wondered if that field might be the only undeveloped land
in the area? I asked myself that question many times, and actually found it
9Mel SHULTZ
Buy by the Acre,
Sell by the Foot
Understanding Real Needs, Financial
Logic, and Asking Questions
173
pretty fascinating. I found it so fascinating, in fact, that the question itself actu-
ally jump-started my real estate career, and the discovery became my strategy.
Driving through your city or town can reveal a great deal about real estate.
For instance, you may have noticed that houses tend to dot the interiors of most
cities and towns while shopping, office, and other commercial properties gen-
erally run along the major streets. This all makes sense once you start to notice
and make mental notes of how most cities and towns develop.
In the late 1970s, driving around seemed like a good way to find real estate. I
didn’t own any sophisticated tools other than maps and a car to explore oppor-
tunities, although I did buy one of the first giant mobile phones that looked and
felt like a brick. Driving along the main streets of my city provided all the options
needed to buy property during this time before instant information. When I
saw larger parcels that were skipped over by development, yet were right in
the path of growth or on the beaten path, it made sense to find out who owned
these underserved parcels and inquire about the status. It seems pretty simple
and obvious; however, there were ample spots that were ignored by most land
buyers and developers. Finding the owners was just one call away to the title
company. Once I found the owner’s number, I handled it just like I learned in
my insurance business training: pick up the phone and meet the prospect. These
prospects were slightly different, though. Rather than the buyers I was used to
calling, this time I was calling sellers, and I was offering to give people money
rather than asking them to write checks.
Hard to believe, but it’s always easier to buy something than it is to sell.
Think about it. In your own life, you’ll find it to be true. The problem is that the
owner knows that what they own is valuable, so it’s worth holding on to. On
the other hand, the owner may not want to go through the process and the risk
of investing the time and money it takes to plan and perform feasibility studies,
as well as other land-use studies that may be required to develop the property.
Even though real estate can be very tax favorable, the process and final enti-
tlement received on the land may negatively affect the tax status for some own-
ers. We always discuss these kinds of tax issues with our tax advisors to be sure
we are never crossing the lines, or if we are, to be fully informed of the negative
tax implications. This is a complex part of the equation, and I absolutely rec-
ommend finding the best real estate tax counsel before even beginning to zone
or make any changes to a piece of real estate. It is just as important to under-
stand the tax and legal aspects at the beginning of a property transaction so you
can get off on the right foot, as it is to understand these same implications when
selling the property purchased. This cannot be emphasized enough. Talk to
professional tax and legal experts.
174 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
I regularly hire and talk to CPAs and lawyers before getting too far down the
road in real estate. My brother’s law practice was the logical entry place for me.
It is the oldest law firm in Arizona with expertise in all areas of real estate. I be-
lieved from the beginning that a portion of my investment dollars were to be
earmarked, first for the land and, second for lawyers and other consultants who
could better my chances for success.
The value of a team is self-evident. I always wanted to be the quarterback of
our team at school. I knew the position was less about heroics and more about
being sure the best support was in front of me. My job then was simply to re-
member the plays and throw or hand the ball to the best players.
The Dictionary of Real Estate Terms, Sixth Edition, defines “entitlement”
as this: The right to develop land with government approvals for zoning
density, utility installations, occupancy permits, use permits, and streets.
Matching Market Needs with
Product Creation
Just because you buy a hotel doesn’t mean it has to stay a traditional hotel. Just
because you buy an apartment building doesn’t mean it needs to stay an apart-
ment building. Markets change, market needs change, and in order to be suc-
cessful, you may find you have to change a property from one kind of product
to another. Here are a few examples:
Converting a traditional hotel into a timeshare property.
Converting a rental apartment into a for-purchase apartment to the renter
or another buyer.
These are examples of matching market needs with product creation. Space
that already existed was transformed to create new revenue sources based on
market demands.
When it comes to land, changes may involve simply splitting one larger lot
into two or more residential lots or changing land permitted for one use to a
different use that is usually better economically. Most often this requires the
approval of the city or town (municipality) to consent to the proposed use
change. This is called rezoning and/or the entitlement process.
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 175
Real Life Story: The Education on 32nd Street
In the mid 1970s, I bought a house on about five acres for $240,000. Within a
short time, a friend asked if he could buy the home. His intent was to change the
zoning from one house per acre to commercial/office use. He offered to pay triple
my price with the caveat that the closing had to wait for up to twelve months. He
figured it would take that long to convince all the residents on the north and south
sides of the property to agree and the city to approve his rezoning plan. This was
my first personal experience watching someone change the use (rezoning) of a
property. I was in my mid-twenties, and it seemed worth waiting a year to make
such a compelling profit.
Time passed; his rezoning was approved, and we closed the deal. This was an
early eye opener. Suddenly, it hit me! I could add value by changing the use of the
underlying land. I decided this was to be part of my new investment path.
Real Life Story: View from the Mountain
With confidence from my 32nd Street experience, I purchased the twenty-nine-
thousand-square-foot McCune Mansion in Paradise Valley, Arizona. The mon-
strous mansion was built by oil tycoon Walker McCune in the 1960s for more than
$3 million. The mansion sat on forty acres of hillside that overlooked the entire city
and the spectacular Camelback Mountain. My plan was to change the use from a
single home to a resort. The city fought the rezoning, so I decided to go with what
they called preferred residential zoning, which included the “hillside ordinance.”
This is where I truly became a real estate developer and gained firsthand knowledge
about the zoning process and lot layout. Each lot building pad had to meet compli-
cated cut-and-fill requirements—how much you could cut into the mountainside
and fill back in to create a building pad. I ended up on the committee with real home-
builders rewriting the town ordinances for slope-and-hillside cutting and refilling.
In the process, I found a buyer who purchased the mansion for the price I paid for
the entire forty acres and mansion. The sale included the mansion and five acres,
which I carved out around the house. I then held onto the remaining land, which
was now converted into twenty-eight one-acre-plus home sites. The lots sold from
$200,000 to $600,000, and I had made my biggest profit yet. I retained one lot to
build a home for my family, but the “desert snakes” were not my friends, so I made
the decision to sell at a later time. Sales topped $10 million.
176 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
My early experience with the mansion on the mountain got me thinking
about the economics of the land business. There’s a story about Abe Lincoln’s
farm that makes the point about creative financial engineering better than I
could ever make on my own. It seems Abe Lincoln bought his family’s farm
from his father, Thomas, when cash got a little tight as a way to bail him out.
Eventually, after Abe became president and one of the great figures of our coun-
try, the friends of the Abe Lincoln Historical Farm near Lerna, Illinois, took on
the ownership. It seems the owners of this land had a brilliant idea. They wanted
to give people of Illinois and the nation the opportunity to own a tiny piece of
American history in an effort to raise money for the owner’s family. They
planned to sell off small parcels of the estate to interested people. When they
parceled out the designated acre, they had more than six million squares to
offer the public. The net return on this is not known, but even with a low price
for the land parcel, I am sure it was substantial.
This is the ultimate subdivision of land, almost beyond the scope of imagi-
nation. But I’m sure it won’t be the last ingenious idea. If I had to start over
today in the real estate business, what would I do? I can answer that question
this way. In the late 1970s we would joke about a wealthy private lender and in-
vestor named Bill Levine. We’d say that if he were dropped out of a plane with
a parachute on his back in the middle of China and with no money, within a
few years he would be one of the wealthiest men in China or wherever else he
happened to fall. Some people just seem to know how to create wealth. They
are the true financial engineers.
Starting is the hardest part of anything in life.
Starting is the hardest part of anything in life. In the early 1970s I had saved
up about $5,000 from my life insurance sales commissions. A real estate firm in
my building had several older, unoccupied houses it was trying to unload. Inside
these old house bones lay bright red carpeting, purple-painted walls, and
linoleum floors from the 1950s. Even the carpet stains were better than the
original colors.
The cash requirement to acquire these homes was straightforward: pay clos-
ing costs, include a few hundred dollars in commissions, and assume the debt.
I thought why not? I soon found that renting these showplaces was not easy
because after I had purchased the properties I didn’t have enough money to re-
paint and update the interiors, nor did I have the mechanical skills to do it my-
self. But somehow, enough renters were willing to take the houses and do their
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 177
own fix ups. From the cash flow I received, I was able to buy more houses and
sell some along the way, accumulating about $10,000 in cash. I didn’t like the
rent collection process much, so after selling my last house in 1973, I immedi-
ately moved on to something a little more sophisticated.
My first office building was just east of 24th Street on Thomas Road in
Phoenix, Arizona, as were my second and third buildings. My logic was after
buying my first building and not knowing where else to buy, it seemed like a
good idea to go next door and buy those buildings, too. If it hadn’t been for
other opportunities that came my way, I may have just kept buying along the
same major road in Phoenix. What did I know? These small office buildings
were, for me, where it really all began.
After selling the first building and making $30,000, I began to get some trac-
tion. The next two were sold as a package with $130,000 in net profit. A Cali-
fornia syndicator was looking for more buildings in Phoenix, and I liked the
idea of negotiating the purchase and sale. My strategy was to buy and improve
the properties, much like the houses I owned, except this time I wanted to be
able to afford to hire contractors. After my house experiences, I learned to set
aside cash up front for this purpose. The old painted white brick needed a mod-
ern look, so we put in new windows and doors, added beige-colored stucco to
the brick exterior, new signage, and a parking lot. This clean, new exterior
brought the building back to life. First impressions are lasting.
Starting Off with Real Estate Math
Getting started with basic real estate math is helpful to me. There are 43,560
square feet in one acre, and there are 640 acres in a section of land. The question
arises regarding land uses and valuations. Commercial land is a higher economic
use than a similar size residential-sized lot. In the course of planning, develop-
ers study the market demands and the appropriate use of a parcel of land and
determine the best land use before buying. The planning and zoning process,
which I learned after my house buying experience, incorporates the information
learned along with the market demand to create the highest and best use. With
that said, consider the math for a parcel of land. It may look something like
this:
On the next page is a very simple illustration of buying in bulk at a “per acre”
price and converting to a “square foot” price. Usually land owners sell large
parcels of unzoned land in areas outside traditional development cores in bulk
at a per-acre price. In urban areas, commercial or multifamily property is usually
178 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
sold by the square foot. It’s really a convenience because it all reverts back to
the dollar amount paid for the land, the ultimate sales price, and profit. This
practice is convenient for both the buyer and seller. It’s similar to the way we
use inches as a measurement division of a foot. For example, rather than say it’s
one-quarter of a foot, we say say three inches, which is easily understood. Per-
haps smaller measurement practices were used to influence a buyer’s percep-
tion of the amount being paid for the product. It is like figuring out why gold is
sold by the ounce and not by the pound. At the end of the day, it’s perception.
Many other projects followed for me. I developed everything from business
parks to large, master-planned communities. The lesson I learned through it all
was to plan and divide the land, visualizing what a property could be and what
it “wanted” to be. A residential community wants a compatible use like a grocery
store, restaurant, pharmacy, or other convenience. That means forcing a prop-
erty to a higher-return use doesn’t make sense if it doesn’t blend and fit into the
surroundings. You’ve driven around your town and seen buildings that don’t
fit. The right products in the right places feel right and look right, and the neigh-
bors know that. I saw how my friend, Joe Beer, went house-to-house to let the
neighbors give input, to ask them questions, and most important, to listen as he
petitioned for rezoning. This is a good practice particularly if you do this with
forethought and patience and are willing to modify and compromise and be
sensitive to the neighbors. You may actually find throughout the process that
the land you bought by the acre may indeed be sold by the square foot.
Let me share a personal story. I was involved a few years back in the sale of a
site for a post office. The buyer wanted an environmental report to ensure there
were no hazardous substances on the site. This is very typical. But as my partners
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 179
Buying by the Acre, and Selling by the Foot
This example may help you see the potential of real estate in a new way.
The purchase price of ten acres is $50,000 per acre, or $500,000 total (zoned
for ten houses).
The final plan for ten acres may be 250 apartment units, which may be worth
$10,000 per unit or $250,000 per acre (after rezoning approval).
This equates to about $5.75 per square foot (43,560 square foot x $5.74 =
$250,000 per acre).
Since the land was acquired for single family and changed to multifamily, the
underlying use created an increased value of five times the original purchase.
180 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
and I were working our way through the
due diligence process with the buyer, an
environmental problem came to our at-
tention. Although the issue seemed to
possess a very low chance of causing any
real problem, the inspectors sent over a
backhoe to test the area. During the test,
a sample of soil showed a completely new
problem: The sample contained oil. Im-
possible, we thought. So, they tested the
same sample again with the same results.
Perplexed and bracing ourselves for a
costly soil remediation, which given the past use of the property seemed un-
fathomable, we decided to take a walk around the property. Thank goodness
we did this. While we were walking by the backhoe, one of us noticed it had an
oil leak. Upon further inspection, the oils matched up with the leaky equipment.
Retested with a new backhoe, the soil turned up clean as originally expected.
Walking the site can make all the difference. Hands on requires a physical look,
not just reading a report.
I have always enjoyed walking around the properties we are buying.
For me, seeing is the difference between knowing and guessing.
Wisdom from the Field
If you want to get involved in real estate (and not just when the economy is
booming) then the following questions may come in handy:
How Can I Learn the Basics of Property Uses
and Potential Changes to Use?
Each city and or municipality has its own ordinances and laws for permitted
uses for property. Find a good zoning lawyer and inquire about current zoning
and permitted changes. A planner or architect who has planned and designed
other local projects is the best source for ideas. Real estate brokers are also an
important part of determining potential tenants or other buyers and/or devel-
opers for parts or all of a properly thought-out land use plan.
TIP
Three “Must Do’s”
to Buy by the Acre
and Sell by the Foot:
1. Plan and divide the land
thoughtfully.
2. Work with the neighbors in
the community.
3. Always be willing to listen
and compromise.
Who Are the Key Members of My Team, and What Do They Do?
In addition to the zoning lawyer, the land planner or architect and the brokers
(both leasing and sales) are critical. You’ll need the following team members to
help you along the way:
Feasibility Experts
This may include economists and often larger brokerage companies who gather
and compile sector reports for vacancy, lease rates, absorption and other reports
to help determine need for product type.
Accountant
This person can put together a financial pro forma to estimate sales, costs, and
potential profits so you can determine your offer price and capital/debt/equity
requirements. The broker should provide sales input projections.
Civil Engineers, Soil Experts, and Contractors
These experts will help you determine the improvement cost estimates you
will need to fully evaluate the property’s potential from topographical and phys-
ical maps to understanding wet and dry utilities.
When you consider the many disciplines required to make all this come to-
gether you see why many avoid this aspect of real estate. It sounds harder than
it really is. Although patience and knowledge are required, after the first few
deals the process becomes clear. It is much like an NBA point guard or a quar-
terback on a football field. Most of your time is spent knowing where your team-
mates are and who to get the ball to. Rarely do you shoot or run; passing the
ball is essential. You learn by doing, and starting with a simple lot split for a
couple of houses is an easy way to experience the process firsthand.
How Do I Find Property That Can Be Rezoned or Changed
to Become a Profitable Venture?
This is the bottom line of the whole exercise. Knowing the market needs and
economics of the specific product that will ultimately be built on the site takes
study and some imagination. Ask questions and write them down. The more ques-
tions you have, the better. A few, but important questions you could ask are these:
What would improve the living quality and/or convenience for the people
who live or work in the area?
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 181
How many people drive by this particular property each day?
How can I help people afford to live in the area or give them a better alterna-
tive for a retail shopping or dining experience?
What about better medical care closer to home or more convenient services
in a certain area?
These questions stimulate the imagination and the possibilities. Most people
ask too few questions. You can build a case for almost any business model if
you ask enough of the right questions.
Bill Gates, founder of Microsoft, was interested in information at the speed
of thought. Billionaire Warren Buffett considered simple businesses that are
run well and provide capital to grow, as places to invest. These investment
strategies have vaulted them to become two of the wealthiest men in the world.
Mr. Buffett is the master of asking questions then boiling them down to the few
most direct and succinct ones that become repeatable observations. True genius
is when you can make the unnoticed concise. Ask and write down a few ques-
tions about land you have noticed regularly.
Why has this been skipped over by the path of development?
Who owns it?
What is the right use or fit for it?
How would the math look if it were used in a different way?
Who would buy or rent whatever I think should be built on this site?
After the experience of completing your first real estate process, you will
have exercised your mind in a way that will help you look at land through new
eyes. The fun for me is to drive by or walk into a project I have been a part of
and know this was a piece of land few considered would ever be a place where
people would want to live, work and play.
After thirty years of planning, negotiating, visualizing, building, and selling
these ideas, I’ve learned that virtually anything is possible if you ask questions.
Analyze and think through the answers, and take the steps to get your mind’s
ideas into pictures and then later into bricks. Remember, bricks are laid one
upon another just like your thoughts. The hardest part is setting the first brick
in place.
182 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Mel Shultz cofounded JDM Properties, Inc., in 1983 as a full-service real
estate firm that develops and manages quality properties in Arizona and
Colorado, including upscale residential and commercial space, and busi-
ness parks. A principal of JDMD Investments, LLC, Mel and his partners
are developing the largest master-planned community in the greater
Phoenix area for more than three hundred thousand residents. Mel was
a general partner of the Phoenix Suns basketball team until the team sold in 2005, and he
was one of the original general partners of the 2001 World Championship Arizona Diamond-
backs baseball team. Mel led the design and build team for the five-thousand-seat Dodge
Theatre in downtown Phoenix. The company’s Web site is www.jdmpartnersllc.com.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 183
Ionce accused Curtis of going “where white men fear to tread.” He laughed out
loud and said, “That’s true.” He went on to say, “I have basketball star Magic
Johnson’s philosophy of going into urban areas and bringing in development and
businesses that lift the area up.” Curtis then added, “Regardless of race, too many
investors just suck the cash out of a neighborhood but never reinvest to improve
it. I invest to reinvest and improve a neighborhood.” This is why Curtis and his
wife, Diana, are respected friends as well as fellow real estate investors.
Today, some of the most beautiful real estate is being boarded up as casualties
of economic decline. It takes a special kind of investor to invest not only to make
money, but to also bring an area in decline back up. I tried it once and did okay
but not great. Truthfully, I was an outsider coming in, hoping to make a quick
buck from a bad situation. Now personally wiser, I have a better appreciation for
what Curtis does. It takes more than knowing about real estate. It takes knowing
the people and the psychology of the neighborhood, and, most importantly, having
a desire to be a part of the community. This is what I have learned about real
estate from Curtis and Diana.
—Robert Kiyosaki
10 Curtis OAKES
It’s All About Adding Value
184
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 185
A s a successful real estate agent, investor, and developer, I’ve shared a stage
as a presenter with Robert Kiyosaki, who is a personal mentor to me. His
ideas and guidance have been instrumental in much of my success. I have pre-
sented seminars with Donald Trump, as well as coauthored with him an audio
CD entitled Three Master Secrets of Real Estate Success. At this writing, my wife
and I are renovating a multimillion-dollar home in an exclusive San Francisco
neighborhood. To boil it all down, I have achieved all of this by following a sim-
ple mantra, one that anyone can understand and apply to achieve similar real
estate successes: Profit from problems. There are two foundational things that
have been a constant for my wife, Diana, and I throughout our process: knowl-
edge and faith.
“My people shall be destroyed because of a lack of knowledge,” Hosea 4:6.
“Faith is the confidence that what we hope for will actually happen. It gives
us assurance about things we cannot see,” Hebrews 11:1.
Your mantra should be this: Profit from problems.
A pristine property with affluent tenants sounds wonderful, doesn’t it? No
huge maintenance issues, little problem collecting rents, and so on. Yes, these
types of properties are easy on the mind, but they also have a significant cost
and little chance to appreciate.
A problem property, on the other hand, has an amazing, and fast, upside po-
tential. For example, let’s say that the going rate for a building in a certain area
is $200,000. The problem property might be worth $140,000. Once the prob-
lems are fixed, however, its value will zoom to the going rate for similar prop-
erties: $200,000. Likewise, rents in a problem building might be low. After you
improve the property, however, you can raise rents—increasing your amount of
income.
This is the concept of “forced appreciation,” which occurs when an investor
purchases a property that’s less than the going market value (usually due to in-
herent problems, such as high vacancy rates, severely deteriorated buildings,
environmental problems, etc.), then fixes the problems that “force” substantial
appreciation in value back up to the current market value. I also call this the
value-added approach, where you take an asset, make various improvements,
and have the asset increase in value. Forced appreciation provides you with a
short-term paper profit, which you can then use to your advantage in a variety
of ways. This value-added approach has helped many, many real estate investors
build everything from small nest eggs to multibillion-dollar fortunes.
TIP
I never focus on or count on appreciation when analyzing whether
or not to purchase a property. To me, market appreciation is always a bonus:
if it happens, great, but if the property doesn’t go up in value based on the
market, that’s okay, too, because I know that I am making what I need to
make on the property in terms of cash flow and depreciation. Likewise, when
someone says that they have an investment that will provide capital gains,
thank them, then turn and run in the other direction! Why? Capital gains are
based on the speculation that something “might” happen in the future to
drive up the value of that investment. The key word here is speculation;
something might happen. By focusing on a value-added approach to real
estate investing, you have much greater control over a property’s
ultimate value.
If you resolve to become a problem solver—someone who embraces rather
than runs away from problems—your chances of achieving success in real estate
investing will dramatically increase. The next step becomes finding appropriate
problem properties.
My Story
I purchased my first home in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in 1979 for $27,800. I
used the G.I. Bill, which meant I had 100 percent financing. I had an adjustable
rate loan with an interest rate of 17.5 percent. That’s obscene by today’s stan-
dards, but at the time I didn’t care. I was thrilled to be a new homeowner,
period. This also was my introduction to leverage, which is using a small amount
of money to purchase a large amount of something else (in this case, real estate).
I began to buy properties as long as I didn’t have to put much money down. I
didn’t care what the interest rate was; as long as I had a positive cash flow,
I bought.
My life as a real estate entrepreneur took another big leap in 1982 when I re-
signed from my government job for the Naval Aviation Supply Office. From the
beginning, I specialized in value-added properties. In Philadelphia, boarded-
up houses were practically everywhere, and that’s what I looked for. Buying
and then turning was easy because I could buy a property for between $5,000
and $30,000 and then decide to either rent or sell.
I had an uncle who came to visit me from San Francisco, California. Every
time he came to visit, he would go on and on about the San Francisco real estate
market. In 1985 he finally convinced me to move to San Francisco to invest in
value-added real estate. However, little did I know that my Philadelphia success
TIP
186 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
in renting and flipping houses couldn’t be duplicated in San Francisco. Why?
Simply because property was so much more expensive. The average duplex at
the time was $250,000. These prices sent my nervous system into shock and
fear. While I had accumulated some funds to invest, I needed a lot more infor-
mation about California real estate before I could begin.
I’ve had my share of challenges and problems. But with patience and
the right approach, value-added real estate investing can work for you, too.
In the meantime, the cost of living and real estate school was beginning to
deplete my investment nest egg. What’s more, this fear of potentially losing
everything held me captive. I wouldn’t do a deal if I saw one! I finally got my
real estate license and immediately went to work in an area in San Francisco to
duplicate my success in Philadelphia. However, in Philadelphia it was relatively
easy to identify value-added real estate. Just find a boarded-up house at a cheap
price, fix it up, and sell it. In San Francisco, however, there were no boarded-up
houses. I had to figure out how to add value in other ways. I finally found the
area and the niche. The area was called Bayview Hunter’s Point, and the niche
was called “in-law apartments.” So I went to work buying single-family homes
(which were selling, at the time, for $50,000 to $75,000) and adding in-law
apartments in the rear of the garages for rental units. Once construction was
completed, I could sell the house for between $175,000 and $199,000. I had a
full-time construction crew, and we were rehabbing and flipping, and life was
good. Now, there are potential pitfalls—I’ve had my share of challenges and
problems. But with patience and the right approach, value-added real estate
investing can work for you, too.
Finding the Right Properties
Now we’ve come to the exciting part, right? Right! Finding the right properties
to invest in is obviously at the heart of long-term and sustained guaranteed suc-
cess in real estate investing. It’s the area that will tap all of your knowledge and
creativity, and where over time you’ll build experience and expertise. You’ll
come to rely on this time and time again. Finding the right properties is equal
parts knowledge and your ability to creatively “see” a property’s potential. In
short, here’s where we marry your brain with your intuition to achieve a com-
plete solution (wholeness).
First, let’s review property types and property classes.
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 187
Property Types
The three types of buildings I’d like to focus on in this chapter are as follows:
Residential. Users live in one to four units. Can be various types, such as single
family, duplex (two units), triplex (three units), and fourplex (four units).
Commercial. Five or more business units, such as an office building or a strip
mall.
Mixed Use. A single building with both residential (people live there) and com-
mercial (businesses) options.
If you are just starting out investing in real estate, I suggest that you begin by
purchasing a two-or four-unit property. This way, you can begin small, leverage
your way into a property, learn all you can, and then move up to a larger property
when you have experience and a positive cash flow.
Property Classes
There are four classes of properties:
Class A. A property less than ten years old, in excellent condition, and with de-
sired amenities, such as a pool or workout center. Class A properties can ask
for, and receive, high rents, generally have a better quality of tenants, usually
have lower maintenance costs, and are easier to manage. These properties are
usually held by (owned by) investor groups and have a lower rate of return.
They are the most sensitive to any downturn in the local or national economy.
Class B. Buildings that are ten to twenty years old and in fairly good overall
condition. Class B properties are considered the most stable of the different
property classes, and are usually located in well-established, middle-income
neighborhoods. They are new enough to offer amenities, yet still old enough to
be affordable to the average investor and tenants.
Class C. Buildings between twenty and thirty years old with limited or nonex-
istent amenities. Both ongoing and long-term maintenance costs are higher be-
cause of aging and the general need for a cosmetic “facelift.” They have a lower
quality of tenants, including those on government assistance. Value can be added
by updating the property.
Class D. Buildings more than thirty years old that need substantial capital im-
provements. Usually located in declining areas, Class D properties usually have
substantial deferred maintenance issues, such as the need to replace the roof,
the electrical system, the HVAC system, etc.
For beginning investors, I suggest that you focus most of your attention
on finding undervalued Class C buildings.
TIP
188 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
You can look for undervalued properties in any of the four classes. However,
please note that for Class A properties, the velocity of your money—the amount
flowing to you—will slow down simply because there is less upside potential.
For beginning investors, I suggest that you focus most of your attention on find-
ing undervalued Class C buildings.
Starting Your Search
Here are the steps I recommend to find undervalued properties.
Step One: Become an Expert in a Particular Area
This generally is the area in which you live. Attempting to become an expert in
a city outside of the state in which you reside, for example, would be time con-
suming and costly. Do as much as you can to study the area. Read the real estate
sections in the local newspapers, drive around, and attend open houses.
This area should be large enough to have diverse neighbors. For example
your initial area might be San Francisco. Over time, once you feel that you’ve
mastered this particular area, then move on to another area.
Here’s an example:
1. Select San Francisco as your area
2. Explore it, study it, drive around, etc.
3. “Master” this area
4. Then select another area such as Oakland
Step Two: Seek Out the Least Expensive Sections
within That Area
Again, you want to find problem properties and then solve the problems. You’ll
find the juiciest problems—and thus the potential for the largest returns—in
the least expensive sections of your focus area.
Step Three: Look for Problem Properties
Once you’ve become an expert in a particular area and identified the least ex-
pensive section within that area, the next step is to begin hunting for problem
properties in that least expensive section.
How do you identify problem properties? They’re usually the eyesore on a
street or block. Signs to look for include buildings with one or more of these
attributes:
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 189
• vacant
• boarded up
• tall grass / weeds
• trash strewn about / overflowing trash cans
• broken windows
• peeling paint
• general poor appearance
You also should be alert to potential property changes, such as:
• building owner wanting to retire / leave
• foreclosures
• probate
• code violations
• zoning variances not renewed or up for re-hearing
• a big-box tenant just left a strip mall
Please note that searching for real estate investment opportunities can be
extremely fun, but it also can be an extremely frustrating process.
Tips As You Begin Your Property Search:
• Stay positive. Searches take time and involve walking around neighborhoods.
There will be missteps and false alarms. Stay positive and have fun, and you’ll be in
the right frame of mind when the right property appears.
• Be present and focused. As much as possible, shut out past failures, negative
thoughts (“The market hasn’t bottomed out yet”), fears of failure, fears of success,
and all other factors that might prevent you from seeing—really seeing—an oppor-
tunity. Those who are present and open to opportunities are almost always the peo-
ple who are able to grab a new opportunity when it comes along.
• Put in the time. There’s a saying in the writing world: To write a book, apply the
seat of your pants to the chair. The same is true when searching for real estate in-
vestment opportunities. You must get out and look for the opportunities. You have
to study the newspapers, drive around town, and network with real estate agents
and lenders.
• Don’t be put off by market conditions. Rarely will you find “perfect” market
conditions when making any investment. There are always problems and potential
pitfalls. Know this and accept it. Don’t let the media, friends, or anyone else dis-
courage you from seeking opportunities.
190 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
This last point bears repeating—never be discouraged by fluctuating market
conditions. Interest rates will always go up, unless they happen to be going
down. Property values will continue to decline until they hit bottom, and then
they will rebound. And so on.
This should be your “Real Estate Opportunity Search” mantra: In any
market, at any time, I can find a great deal.
Here is your “Never Give Up” mantra: Diligence leads to destiny.
You should actively search out potential deals. As well, you should create
networks of people, tools, and resources to send potential deals your way. Here
are ways to create a flow of deals—or at least whispers about potential deals:
• www.loopnet.com
• other investors
• real estate agents and brokers
• real estate lenders
• attorneys
• CPAs
• property management companies
TIP
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 191
TABLE 10.1 Personal Reflections
Brainstorm and list who else might be a “deal source” for you:
Property Criteria and Analysis
Once you’ve identified a potential investment property, it’s time to closely study
the property for both short-term and long-term opportunities. You will want to
put each prospective property through a rigorous review, using the following
criteria:
1. Guiding Investment Principles
a. Leverage
b. Cash Flow
c. Cash-on-Cash Return
d. Capitalization Rate
e. Gross Rent Multiplier
2. S.W.O.T. (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats)
3. Trends
4. Demographics
Now, I could write an entire book about these four key areas of property analy-
sis. Here, though, let me summarize each of these points quickly.
Leverage
Leverage simply means that you want as little of your money as possible used
to secure the biggest opportunity possible. The less money you have to invest
in a property, in other words, the larger the opportunity for a big payoff. When
analyzing a property, know exactly what you will initially need to invest.
Positive Cash Flow
A key to building my real estate fortune over the years has been cash flow. We
call cash flow “king” because having cash is always our primary objective. Pos-
itive cash flow creates and maintains your investment’s momentum. It also has
significant financing and lending implications. For example, when purchasing
an apartment building containing more than five units, the bank will base the
amount it will lend you on the building’s cash flow abilities. (Your credit score
is secondary.) Cash flow also is a significant factor in the building’s overall value.
A building with poor cash flow will appraise much lower than another compa-
rable building in the same area that has a stronger cash flow. Never forget that.
Double Digit Cash-on-Cash Return
This is the velocity of your money. In other words, you want to know at the be-
ginning of an investment how long it will take the money you invest (primarily
192 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
the down payment) to come back to you. This is critical because you want to
invest that down payment over and over again in other investment properties,
so the quicker that you’re able to receive back that initial payment, the quicker
you can apply it to another opportunity.
Cash-on-Cash Return defined: This is the amount of cash you receive
from a property investment in a specified time period as a percentage of your
initial investment in that property.
Here are several examples using the same down payment amount ($20,000)
but different cash flow amounts per year.
As you can see, this table shows how many years it takes for your down pay-
ment to come back to you. In the first scenario, it takes one year. In the second
scenario, it takes two years, and in the third, three years. Your cash-on-cash re-
turn is 100 percent, 50 percent, and 33 percent, respectively.
Your goal as an investor should be a cash-on-cash return in the 10 percent to
20 percent range. Anything above 20 percent is considered an exceptional cash-
on-cash return.
Capitalization Rate of 7 Percent or Higher
The cap rate measures a building’s performance without considering the mort-
gage financing. If you paid all cash for the invest property, how much money
would it potentially make? What’s the return? A high cap rate usually means a
higher risk investment and a low sales price. High cap rates are typically found
in poor, low-income areas. A low cap rate usually indicates there’s less risk and
a high sales price. Low cap rates are generally found in middle-class to upper-
income areas. If you know the net operating income (NOI) and the cap rate,
you can calculate what the sales price should be using this formula:
NOI / Cap Rate = Sales Price
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 193
TABLE 10.2
Down
Payment
Yearly
Cash Flow
Years to Pay Back
Down Payment
Cash-on-Cash
Return
$20,000 $20,000 1 100%
$20,000 $10,000 2 50%
$20,000 $6,000 3 33%
The Cap Rate measures a building’s performance without taking into
consideration the mortgage financing. It is the Net Operating Income divided
by the sale price.
Gross Rent Multiplier of 9 or Lower
Gross Rent Multipliers (GRM) are used as a measure to compare income prop-
erties within a particular area or neighborhood. For example, for three proper-
ties within a similar area of town, you could calculate the gross rent multiplier
for each, then compare the three. If all other factors were equal, you would se-
lect the property with the lowest GRM. In general, as the gross rent multiplier
decreases, cash flow increases. And conversely, as the GRM increases, cash flow
typically decreases.
Gross Rent Multiplier is the ratio of the price of a real estate investment
to its annual rental income. The lower the ratio, the better.
S.W.O.T.
S.W.O.T. stands for Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats. A com-
mon business evaluation tool, S.W.O.T. also applies to investment real estate
simply because each property will have its own unique strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats. The savvy real estate investor—the one seeking guar-
anteed success—will put each property through a detailed S.W.O.T. analysis.
Please note that generally speaking, this is a subjective analysis. In other
words, there are no “right” or “wrong” answers. Likewise, many factors are in-
terconnected. For example, a property’s weakness—such as needing a fresh coat
of paint—might also be an opportunity—a fresh coat of paint can quickly in-
crease the overall look of the property, and thus its value.
Trends
Part of your property-seeking work should be to pay close attention to trends,
or similar new tendencies displayed by a large number of people. For example,
in the past, many city dwellers moved out of the city into the suburbs. Over the
last several years, however, the trend has become the opposite. Because of rising
gasoline prices and other factors, people in cities are “cocooning”—they want
to live within walking distance of work, stores, restaurants, and so on.
Learning about new trends through the media and other information outlets
is important. An investor will have become exposed to even more opportunities
TIP
TIP
194 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
if he “sees” a new or developing trend before it becomes known and published
through the media.
How can you spot new trends as they begin to develop? It’s a bit of an art,
but generally speaking you can:
• Observe what’s going on around you. Pay particular attention to what peo-
ple are doing differently. For example, eight or ten years ago, SUVs were all
the rage. It seemed like everyone had one. Over time, however—again, be-
cause of rising gasoline prices and other environmental issues—SUV pur-
chases declined, and a new type of transportation emerged called hybrid
cars.
• Read, read, read. Read as much as you can: newspapers, magazines, local
real estate magazines, and so on. And vary the sources and subject matter.
What do I mean by “varied”? Every so often, read something different, a
newspaper or periodical that you normally wouldn’t read. As well, do a little
Web surfing. What are people discussing on blogs in your community? What
new Web sites are popping up on housing, community life, and other related
topics? The more that you can broaden the information you take in, the more
you can begin to see emerging trends and other issues. This is known, gener-
ally, as “connecting the dots.” Become a dot-connector.
• Listen, listen, listen. Get out in the world, and then listen to people. What
are they doing differently? What are thinking about doing differently? What
are they interested in? Excited about? Fed up with? Your friends, family,
neighbors, and business colleagues are a fantastic wealth of information re-
garding what’s going on in the world. Ask questions, then listen to them.
Demographics
A final part of your property analysis should be demographics, or statistical
data about a particular population, such as the people in the city in which you
want to invest. Demographic research provides a snapshot of population, in-
come, industries, biggest employers, and other economic details for a particular
city or area.
Demographic information can be found at libraries, city and county govern-
ment offices, and of course the Internet offers an abundance of demographic
information. Suggested Web sites to locate demographic information include:
• www.freedemographics.com
• http://realestate.yahoo.com/Neighborhoods
• http://realestate.yahoo.com/Homevalues
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 195
196 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
• www.elook.org
• www.economy.com (fee site)
• www.city-data.com
• http://quickfacts.census.gove/qfd/
Demographics That Favor Investing
When reviewing demographic information and trends, watch for these charac-
teristics that are generally favorable for investing in a particular property:
• More females than males (females tend to “nest”)
• Higher percentage of singles vs. married (singles rent apartments)
• Higher percentage of younger and older people versus middle-age (middle-age
people buy homes).
• Annual income at or lower than $40,000 (home prices push them to rent apart-
ments)
•The stability and profitability of the area’s largest employer
Key information you also want to review regarding the property’s physical
location include the following:
• How close is it to public transportation?
• What’s the city’s plan for that particular area?
• How close is it to a park?
• How close is it to a school?
• How close is it to shopping and restaurants?
Finally, you should ask yourself a simple question:
Do you want to invest in this area?
Key Success Principle: Have a Great Team
As my wife, Diana, and I began to acquire what become more than twenty cash-
flowing properties in San Francisco, we eventually put together a team to begin
tackling larger problems. Our most successful team consisted of attorney Eliz-
abeth Erhardt, who specializes in evictions, and Sia Tahbazof, whose engineer-
ing and architectural brilliance could always see the intrinsic value that others
often could not see on adding value to a property. Diana and I would buy build-
ings in San Francisco with brick foundations or with difficult tenants paying
very low rents under rent control, and we would quickly pull the trigger and
close the deal. Our goal was to add value by completely remodeling all the build-
ings we purchased. Liz would negotiate deals with the tenants, and Sia would
get all our plans quickly through the planning process. On most of our projects
we used a 1031 Exchange to acquire larger properties and others we rented.
They all cash-flowed, but what was even better was that for most of the prop-
erties the value tripled and not because the market went up or down.
Here’s an important point: The relationship we had with our team was far
more important than all of the money we ever made. There will never be a deal
that is more important than the relationships. Today, Liz Erhardt is one of San
Francisco’s top attorneys regarding tenant/landlord issues. We are still very
good friends; she will take my call and we go on and on about our “war stories”
from the trenches fifteen years ago. Sia Tahbazof is semi-retired and works only
on his own projects these days, but we are still very good friends. To this day
Diana and I work exclusively with Sia Consulting Engineering on our local
projects.
The relationship we had with our team was far more important than all
of the money we ever made. There will never be a deal that is more important
than the relationships.
I believe a large part of our success as a team was based on the saying, “Every-
one stay in their lane.” (I remember running anchor at the Penn State relays in
middle school and the track coach always saying, “Stay in your lane!”) Staying
in your lane shortens the race. Curtis’s lane was to be in charge of the demo
and rough work, and Diana’s was in charge of the finishes; Liz was in charge of
tenants; and Sia was engineering, design, plans, and the city’s approval.
Always be thinking about how you can build the best team possible to support
both your short- and long-term efforts.
I believe a large part of our success as a team was based on the saying
“Everyone stay in their lane” because staying in your lane shortens the race.
Problems . . . or Opportunities
If you resolve to become a problem solver, your chances of success in real estate
investing will dramatically increase. The key question then becomes: What is
your tolerance for problems?
TIP
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 197
You see, opportunities are never easy. Problems, challenges, and setbacks al-
most always occur. Those who shy away from the hard work needed to embrace
opportunities fail. Over the years I’ve had friends and acquaintances come to
me wanting to partner with me on various real estate projects. Often they back
out. Why? It’s like a rope strung across the two sides of the Grand Canyon.
They see a tightrope; I see a bridge.
What can we do to strengthen our faith so that we can embrace and overcome
more problems? That answer is easy. Take more chances. Truly successful peo-
ple pursue opportunities based on faith. They don’t let fear get in their way.
Successful people—the Donald Trumps of the world, for example—also are con-
stantly strengthening their faith. They are admitting their fears but pursuing
opportunities anyway. When we let fear rule our lives, we don’t take chances.
When we live by faith, we pursue opportunities and take controlled risks.
When I was younger, I left my government job, where I was earning $60,000
a year, to become a real estate agent and investor. I was excited. I had recently
read Napoleon Hill’s Think and Grow Rich and was ready to set the world on
fire—and to do so immediately. But things didn’t happen so quickly. In fact, for
several months, no opportunities materialized. Zero, none, nada. My savings
began to dwindle. And then do you know what happened? My mind, which had
been positive and focused on possibilities, began to worry. My dreams turned—
mentally—from delights to disasters.
Eventually I overcame this initial slow time, and my investing took off. Only
those who have the courage and the tenacity to never give up in the face of set-
backs and other obstacles will achieve success.
Success then isn’t a straight line; it’s a series of starts and stops, two steps
forward, and then one step back. Here’s what I thought success would look
like:
198 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
FIGURE 10.1 What I Thought Success Would Look Like
And here is what it actually did look like:
Only those who have the courage and the tenacity to never give up
in the face of setbacks and other obstacles will achieve success.
If you have the patience to pursue and overcome problems, your chances for
real estate successes will skyrocket. Remember your mantra:
Profit from Problems
You see, I believe that this concept of adding value to real estate can carry
over into your life in many, many other ways. For example, too often I see and
meet people who are focused on making less of other people or things. Instead,
I want to encourage you to make more of every person you come in contact
with. Avoid labels; there’s no real right and wrong, just different points of view.
Regardless of where you are in life right now, you can make the decision to
reach up and out in your life and help others do the same.
Curtis Oakes has been a top-performing realtor for Coldwell Banker in
San Francisco for more than two decades, placing him in the top 3 percent
of all Coldwell Banker agents nationwide. In 1994, Curtis and his wife
formed the Oakes Group, specializing in San Francisco Bay Area real estate
sales, investment, and development. His passion for helping others has
permeated his real estate practice, and he’s helped countless individuals
realize their dream of home ownership and investment property acquisition. Through his pro-
prietary Oakes Group Mentoring Program, he teaches wealth building through real estate.
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 199
y
FIGURE 10.2 What the Path to Success Really Looks Like
Ihave known John for more than thirty years. He and I were both Marine Corps
officers and played on the same rugby team in Hawai’i. He is known as the
Burger King of Hawai’i because he brought the franchise to the islands. Although
he no longer owns the franchise, having sold it a number of years ago for a stunning
profit, he is still known as the Burger King of Hawai’i because the name fits. John
is the king of using fast food franchises to acquire priceless real estate.
In my book Rich Dad Poor Dad I wrote about Ray Kroc, the person who made
McDonald’s famous and built it into a multibillion-dollar enterprise. In the book,
Ray asks a group of students from the University of Texas, “What business am I
in?” The response from the students was, “You’re in the hamburger business.” Ray
shook his head and said, “No, I’m in the real estate business.” Today, McDonald’s
owns the most expensive real estate in the world. Ray’s formula was to use a Mc-
Donald’s franchise to pay for the real estate.
John, the Burger King of Hawai’i, uses the same formula, the formula of using
a business to buy property. I too use the same formula today. Today my apartment
house business, fitness club business, and office rental business pay for my real es-
tate. It is a formula used all over the world. The formula of your business buys
your real estate.
—Robert Kiyosaki
11 John FINNEY
Analyzing the Deal, or
Adventures in Real Estate
200
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 201
I have always been intrigued by the acquisition, ownership, and sale of real
estate. For the majority of my professional life I’ve been advising people and
making personal decisions about whether or not I should acquire real estate,
how to acquire a particular piece of real estate, and finally whether to sell it,
develop it, or simply hold it. That means as a practicing attorney and a private
investor, I’ve reviewed hundreds of real estate transactions with a “stop or go”
decision point. And the projects are varied. I have developed and sold office
and residential condominiums (small and large); acquired and operated ranches
and farms; developed and operated warehouse complexes; and financed, de-
veloped, and refinanced myriad other real estate–related business ventures.
However, my principal focus today and over the last forty years has been the
consistent financing, development, and operation of quick-serve (fast-food)
restaurants and convenience stores under franchise agreements with national
franchise companies. It’s fascinating work acquiring sites and handling the fi-
nancing and development of those properties. It’s also been fascinating to own,
operate, and sell nearly one hundred of these quick-serve establishments over
these past forty years. My efforts have taken me all over the western United
States, Guam, Hawai’i, and Russia.
With this kind of background, analyzing deals has become second nature.
And that’s what this chapter is all about: “Analyzing the Deal” as it relates to
the intelligent acquisition and operation of fast-food restaurants, convenience
stores, and related franchise businesses. However, don’t be mistaken that the
principles set out here will apply only to quick-serve restaurants and conven-
ience stores. That couldn’t be further from the truth. The principles here are
fundamental and will apply to entrepreneurial ventures of all kinds, particularly
if they involve real estate.
Time and again, having a law background has helped when it comes to ana-
lyzing the deal at hand. But the true tempering of my deal-related judgment
comes from my involvement in building and operating fast-food companies in
Hawai’i, Guam, Nevada, Colorado, and Russia. The scope of my experience in-
cludes the location, financing, development, and operation of Burger King
restaurants, Carl’s Jr. restaurants, El Pollo Loco restaurants, Subway sandwich
restaurants, Circle K convenience stores, and 76 gas stations, among others.
This involvement in franchise deals has necessarily brought me in direct contact
with major national brand franchisors with whom I have had extensive negoti-
ations. Most of these franchise opportunities have proved successful, but there
were a couple of spectacular exceptions, which I will get into later. In every
case my experience in analyzing the deal at the outset proved to be a key to
success or failure.
In this chapter, I will set out the principles that you can use in your own
pursuit of workable, profitable real estate deals that meet your expectations. I
am always suspect of people who talk only of their successes but not of their
failures. The reality, as you and I know, is that no business endeavor is perfect.
Heartache and despair happen from time to time. That’s par for the course for
someone who is truly driven by and committed to success. So don’t expect all
blue sky success stories; I will share with you some significant failures I have
experienced as well. They were important learning opportunities for me, teach-
ing me lasting lessons about this field. I know they will be important for you,
too, because in most cases these costly mistakes resulted from my failure to an-
alyze the deal correctly at the outset.
My goal is to provide you with a basic construct to direct your analysis of
real estate and other deals, and to aid you in making intelligent stop-and-go de-
cisions concerning these deals. It’s critical to put some meat on these “bones of
wisdom” so that you will be able to address any deal presented to you with
practical and useful guidelines. These guidelines to intelligent deal analysis are
particularly relevant in a tough economic climate, but they are also foundational
and have stood and will continue to stand the test of time.
The Real World of Me
At the very outset of any deal consideration, one needs to engage in some serious
introspection. Is this deal ( job, purchase, career, etc.) what you really want or
need? Does your self image allow you to be passionate about the basic endeavor
you are considering? Does the deal with its projected result produce the kind
of monetary and emotional return you are looking for? Does “doing” the deal
involve a sacrifice of time and/or require relocation, thereby effectively pre-
venting you from pursuing more important life goals such as good and involved
parenting, active and healthy lifestyle choices, team sports activity, church or
civic leadership, continued or advanced formal education, personal relation-
ships, or living in a safe and attractive home environment. In other words, if
doing the deal, no matter how successful, will make your life or your family’s
life miserable, then keep moving. It’s not for you.
202 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
You don’t need to do the first deal you see, nor do you need to pursue
every deal that seems halfway good or reasonable. Wait for the deal to come
down the track that is really for you.
My former partner, Robert Pulley, used to frequently say that deals are like
streetcars since there’s always another one coming down the track. Over time I
have come to realize how true this postulate is. I used to pursue to thoughtful
decision almost every deal that came across my desk regardless of what it was,
where it was, or what it cost. By allowing my curiosity to take charge, I spent
too much time spinning my wheels rather than focusing on realities. That cu-
riosity and arrogance concerning my personal entrepreneurial capacity (I
thought I could finance and manage anything) got me into some bad business
spots, literally and figuratively. My experiences in Russia and in the nightclub
and cemetery businesses (discussed later) represent painful memories that have
stayed with me.
The fact is, you don’t need to close on the first deal you see, nor do you need
to pursue every deal that seems halfway good or reasonable. Wait for the deal
to come down the track that is right for you. Your time is your most valuable as-
set, so spend it wisely. Let the obvious impracticalities of any deal you consider
speak to you loudly. This is true no matter how apparently lucrative any deal
may seem. Just because the latest and seemingly hottest franchise deal is avail-
able in your city doesn’t mean that it’s right for you. If flipping hamburgers in
Detroit, selling cemetery plots in Guam, or polishing cars, creating signs and
banners, or teaching math to preteens doesn’t really fit you or create a passion
within you to succeed, don’t do it. Just fold up your cards and wait for a new
hand to be dealt. Don’t let your current circumstances, no matter how unsatis-
fying, chase you into a situation where you will work harder, go into debt, and
actually lose money doing something you hate.
The Real World of Me
• Engage in serious introspection.
• Ask yourself: Will doing the deal prevent me from achieving my personal life goals?
• Deals are like streetcars since there’s always another one coming down the track.
• If the deal doesn’t fit, don’t submit!
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 203
Spend some quality time on “the real world of me” before you invest your
time chasing a deal that just doesn’t suit you or takes you to places that will ul-
timately make you unhappy, even if you are successful.
Will the Dogs Like It?
You’ve taken the time to be introspective; it’s now time to look hard at the deal
that’s in front of you. You know, the one that looks, smells, and feels right for
you.
A very astute Hawai’i-based Chinese businessman, whom I had the pleasure
to work with in my early legal career, used to have a favorite saying to charac-
terize any deal. He applied this saying to the many, many deals he considered.
He would pause after reviewing the deal situation and ask, “But will the dogs
like it?”
He meant that if a deal looks good, is workable, is affordable, and is in a good
location, then the customers (tenants, purchasers, etc.) still have to show up to
make it happen. He insisted at the outset that just because something may look
right to you, it may not be quite so right to the man or woman on the street. You
and your wife (partner, friend, banker, college business professor, etc.) might
think you have the newest take on sliced bread; however, you must take off the
rose-tinted glasses and look at the deal high and low. In other words, strive for
total objectivity in your deal analysis.
Just because something may look right to you, it may not be quite so
right to the man or woman on the street.
A couple of deals from my past point out the usefulness of being truly objec-
tive. In 1977, my partner, Robert Pulley, and I opened the first Burger King
restaurant in the state of Hawai’i, right across the street from a busy and well-
located McDonald’s restaurant. At that time in Hawai’i, McDonald’s was pretty
much the whole ballgame in terms of branded quick-serve hamburgers. After
sampling Burger King’s food and visiting existing Burger King restaurants on
the mainland, we both agreed that the concept would work well in the Islands.
And, even before we opened in Honolulu, we had customers banging on our
restaurant doors to get in while we were still obviously under construction. We
realized that we had a real winner on our hands. The “dogs” really liked our
hamburgers. We set first day, first week, and first month sales records for gross
sales for the entire Burger King chain. In fact, our drive-through service lane
TIP
204 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
routinely filled up and cars backed up on the very busy Beretania Street for
more than a mile. We had to hire off-duty policemen to control and direct traffic
for seven months before we got things under control.
Our customers fell in love with Burger King. We had a very good product
that was absolutely unique to Hawai’i at that time. There was a pent-up demand
for fast-food hamburgers other than McDonald’s hamburgers. To my partner’s
credit, we obtained a “bulletproof” location right across from a key competitor
that we knew was very successful. And, we delivered good food fast. We had
analyzed the deal objectively based on good information. In fact, as it turned
out, we underestimated how much the dogs would like it.
On the other hand, I had the opposite experience with the introduction of
the El Pollo Loco restaurant chain into Hawai’i some years later. I, along with
my key employees, had eaten at El Pollo Loco in Southern California. The El
Pollo Loco concept essentially involves charbroiling fresh and big fryer chickens
to golden brown and serving the charbroiled chicken with tortillas, beans, and
rice. The “dogs” really liked this product in Southern California where there is
a strong Hispanic tradition. People there of all types are quite familiar with
tacos, tamales, and tortillas, and fajitas. They viewed El Pollo Loco as a good
Mexican food concept and made it very popular.
In addition to knowing the food was good and popular (in Southern Califor-
nia at least), we had the money and expertise to develop the chain in premier
locations in Hawai’i. So we obtained the area franchise, and with the success of
Burger King in Hawai’i encouraging us, we felt sure we could create another
major quick-serve restaurant success. We opened two El Pollo Loco locations
at about the same time. Imagine our disappointment when we found that the
dogs didn’t like the product in Hawai’i. Imagine our financial losses.
The El Pollo Loco concept depended on some customer familiarity with
Mexican food preparation and service. What seemed routine in terms of Mexi-
can food service to Southern Californians mystified many (if not most) of our
good Hawaiian customers. The concept involved the simple act of pulling the
chicken meat off the half-chicken serving and wrapping it in a warm tortilla
with beans, rice, and salsa, thereby creating a world-class chicken fajita. In
Hawai’i, the customers did not combine the ingredients (despite clever and in-
structive graphics on every table and menu); they typically ate the chicken serv-
ing, which was delicious, picked at the rice and beans, and threw the beautiful,
warm flour tortillas away. We were stunned.
There was already huli-huli (flame-broiled) chicken all over the island of
Oahu, which was a popular and long-standing fund-raising vehicle. Typically,
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 205
community groups involved in fund-raising would set up huli-huli wagons in
parking lots on weekends at several locations on the island. They would build
charcoal fires in the huli-huli wagons and proceed to prepare and sell tasty
flame-broiled chickens (whole and halves) to the public at relatively inexpensive
prices. So in addition to our customer’s failure to grasp the El Pollo Loco concept,
we had a serious competitor that we never considered until it was too late.
Will the Dogs Like It?
• Is the product something that you would personally buy at the likely asking price?
• Is the product unique or better than the comparable products sold by competitors?
• Is the product too complicated or too much trouble for your customers?
• Take off your rose-tinted deal glasses and look at the relevant market objectively.
Without the customers’ grasp of the chicken fajita preparation, the El Pollo
Loco chicken was simply good chicken. It wasn’t really very unique, and it was
pretty expensive compared to huli-huli chicken. We actually didn’t fail com-
pletely, but our losses forced us to sell out to Kentucky Fried Chicken. KFC
wanted to get rid of El Pollo Loco on the Islands, and our modest success was
hurting their business. So we took the easy way out with a lesson well learned.
Garbage In, Garbage Out
Projected financial results, as you can imagine, are the primary concern in ana-
lyzing any deal, and when it comes to the numbers it’s garbage in, garbage out.
Essentially, if your sales projections or your cost projections are bad going in,
the resulting projected bottom line (profit and cash flow) numbers are not only
unreliable but outright dangerous to your financial well-being.
Up until now, everything we have discussed has been preparatory to real
deal focus. Now it’s time to get to the heart of our task. As you’ve seen, the
numbers aren’t the only consideration, but they certainly are most critical to
the stop-or-go deal decision. With my focus on the development of franchise
deals, I often had access to very reliable historical sales data from other fran-
chise operations in comparable demographic areas. Typical numbers relating
to fast-food operations, convenience stores, gas stations, and other similar op-
erations are often made available to the prospective franchisees in the manda-
206 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
tory disclosure document that each prospective franchisee must receive under
the Uniform Franchise Act enacted in most states. These “pro forma” (pro-
jected) numbers are useful in analyzing the deal—and other deals involving the
same or similar product delivery—in most franchise opportunities.
Of course, using pro forma numbers to analyze a potential deal amounts to,
at best, intelligent guesswork. In every case, one has to massage these pro forma
numbers to fit the situation at hand. The pricing construct has to be adjusted
up or down to fit the intended location. Additionally, an equally important con-
cern is to evaluate the relevant market (assuming the dogs like the product) to
arrive at reasonable projected transaction counts and customer counts.
Counting “heads” is the first step in evaluating a fast-food location. I have
spent many hours personally counting every vehicle passing by my target loca-
tion. In tourist locations, I often count the people who walk by every hour in
high- and low-traffic periods. Getting a good handle on real numbers of poten-
tial customers who have direct exposure to your location is really chapter one
in the sales number guessing book. So don’t skip actually doing a thorough, re-
alistic head count or traffic count.
Of course, what your closest and most relevant competitor is actually achiev-
ing in gross sales is also absolutely key to your analysis of projected gross sales.
And if you don’t have a close competitor you are either really lucky or more of-
ten than not, in the wrong location altogether. I don’t care how you get these
competitor numbers, but you must get them. This sales data can often be dis-
covered through a review of public tax filings (i.e., gross excise tax data) or by
simply interviewing your competitor’s former employees or managers. You
might want to hire them anyway, so you certainly can interview them. In sum-
mary, you must get solid and realistic projected gross sales numbers to avoid
creating garbage in, garbage out projections.
Projected sales are only half the story. Projected expenses are equally im-
portant when it comes to developing usable bottom-line projections. Projected
expenses can almost always be estimated reasonably with hard work. We are
fortunate in the United States to have the remarkably efficient distribution of
goods and services at comparable and fair pricing (assuming you pay your bills
on time). With the exception of utility costs and gas, which historically can
make dramatic moves to the upside, your costs for food, paper, products, pro-
duce, and people tend to be relatively stable. In quick-serve restaurants, gas
stations, and convenience stores, you can move your pricing daily if necessary
so you can preserve your profit margins as costs move up. Of course, you are
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 207
always limited by the competitive atmosphere, but given a product or products
the dogs like, reasonable pricing, and a good location, you can come up with
projected financial results that are sensible enough to make a deal decision.
If you have hit your mark in projecting future gross sales and have a good
understanding of your expenses, you should be able to derive some fairly good
and usable guesses at cash flow and profitability numbers. When I have really
done my homework, I have been able to avoid the garbage in, garbage out syn-
drome that turns business projections into birdcage lining. When I didn’t do
the work of counting vehicles and heads, or failed to research the success or
failure of my closest competitors, my deal analysis was faulty. If I failed to be
diligent in projecting reliable expense numbers, I had garbage or unrealistic
expense numbers to factor into my profitability formula. Sometimes I got lucky
and things turned out better than I had hoped for. However, you can’t rely on
luck and the mistakes that are burned into my brain resulted from overly ag-
gressive sales projections and garbage out at the projected bottom line.
When I have really done my homework, I have been able to avoid
the garbage in, garbage out syndrome that turns business projections into
birdcage lining.
Years ago, I along with my partner, Robert Pulley, built a Burger King restau-
rant in the heart of Waikiki in Honolulu, Hawai’i. Although the site was on the
ground floor in the front of the popular Kings Village shopping center, the actual
walk-by traffic seemed a little thin for this very expensive location. However,
one-half block away on Waikiki Beach were absolute throngs of tourists, mostly
milling about at the popular corner of Liliuokalani and Kalakaua avenues. My
personal tourist head count revealed several thousand potential customers pass-
ing through this adjacent and very popular intersection every hour.
The downside of this location was that the view from this key corner to my
target restaurant site was largely blocked by a ticket and information booth. A
bad deal! So if I was going to choose this site, I’d have to adjust my sales projec-
tions way down. After all, they were based on actual walk-by traffic at the time.
The obstruction by the ticket booth meant there was nothing to draw customers
our way from that busy corner. My partner and I fortunately engaged in some
“what-if” analysis before passing on this potentially great site. Our conclusion
was that if we could create unobstructed sight-line visibility from this major
tourist corner to our site, the deal would work. So I made a last-minute potential
“deal-breaker” demand to the landlord that the offending ticket booth be re-
TIP
208 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
moved to clear up the sight line. Fortunately, the landlord agreed. They wanted
us in the center. So we ended up with probably the most successful quick-serve
restaurant I have ever built. The dogs liked us, now they could see us, and there
were plenty of dogs! Our first-year sales were more than $2.7 million out of less
than twenty-seven hundred square feet. These are hall of fame numbers for
fast food.
On the other hand, I once developed a cemetery on a parcel of land that my
then partner, Bernard Bays—also a contributor in this book—and I had acquired
to develop high-end residential condominiums. How did a parcel of land go
from high-end condos to burial plots? Simple answer: Hurricane Iniki and an-
cient but unmarked graves on the property. As you can well imagine, everyone
I knew razzed me with the old joke, “Hey John, I hear people are dying to get
into your new project.” Yeah, wrong kind of dying. All joking aside, the gross
sales potential on paper from any new cemetery is just phenomenal. Anytime
you can convert, as an example, six acres into six thousand saleable grave plots
in a major metro area, your potential ultimate sellout can be as high as $15 to
$20 million! Since our land was already paid for, I had only to face cemetery
approval and development costs, which I had a pretty good handle on. So I con-
structed some very elaborate and detailed sales and cash-flow projections that
convinced Bays, myself, and several of our associates that we had a winner in-
deed, even if it wasn’t via condo development. The cash flow-to-cost ratio was
very favorable on what seemed to be ultimately reasonable sales projections.
Our deal analysis looked really good, but it was very wrong.
Unfortunately, I grossly overestimated how quickly people would buy burial
plots in the cemetery. We had originally built the cemetery with the thought of
selling it to a major company involved in the funeral home/cemetery business.
In fact, we had a basic agreement that this company would run the cemetery
and ultimately buy the operation and property at a price yielding a substantial
profit to our group. So, even though we really had no experience actually oper-
ating a cemetery, we proceeded to develop it anyway. We wrongly assumed that
our deal to sell to the pros would go through before we actually had to operate
the cemetery business. The projected cash flow made us confident of closing
such a sale. Unfortunately, our prospective buyers went into bankruptcy a short
time after completion of the cemetery. There I was a fast food impresario, taking
over cemetery operations.
I was stuck with the job as head “cemeterian,” which I knew little about and
greatly disliked. I soldiered ahead because our projected numbers still looked
terrific. We still had millions of dollars in unsold inventory already paid for and
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 209
210 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
waiting to be sold. I just didn’t figure that it might take my lifetime to sell this
inventory. Talk about garbage in, garbage out. I would likely be buried in this
cemetery, and there still would be more than half the plots left to sell!
Many years later after investing countless and thankless hours learning about
and actually running the cemetery, I finally ended up selling it at a loss. My
partners and I are now much older and wiser. My projections of cemetery plot
sales were based on selling significant numbers of plots from the get-go. We
did finally begin to see significant sales of plots every month. However, this
sales tempo took years to achieve. What I did not factor into my projected plot
sales was the essential attribute of “heritage,” which every new cemetery must
gain slowly if at all before significant plot sales can be achieved. This is particu-
larly true in smaller cities with more limited population bases.
The simple truth is that it is hard to get families to bury their deceased loved
ones in new places. If aunty and uncle are buried in the public cemetery, the rest
of the family will also likely want to be interred there no matter how “seedy” the
old town cemetery has become. People will come to a new cemetery, but it takes
time. They are dying to get in but just not fast enough at a new cemetery. So my
decision to proceed to build a cemetery was driven by sales projections that
were honestly derived but simply too aggressive for this kind of business. This
was particularly true since we lost our major cemetery consolidator/operator at
the very outset. My deal analysis was faulty because of overly aggressive “gar-
bage” sales projections.
Garbage In, Garbage Out
• Access and use sales numbers from the best sources available (franchisor stan-
dard disclosures and competitor numbers, for example)
• Count the “heads” and/or traffic personally
• Do your homework when you work up expense projections
• Ask the “what-if” question before passing on a deal
• If you build it to sell, you better have a “bulletproof” buyer
Build It and They Will Come (or Not)
Now that I have discussed some practical concerns that will prepare you for
getting into a deal and shared some stories and my opinion about the relevance
of numbers to every deal, it’s time to focus on the question of location. Although
I have related most of my discussion to quick-serve restaurants, convenience
stores, and related businesses, the location question is central to analyzing any
real estate deal.
It is often said that the three most important aspects of any real estate deal
are location, location, and location. This is true, true, and true in any fast-food-
type deal, but it is also the compelling issue in most real estate deals. Certainly,
it is the central issue in the real estate deals I am referring to in this chapter.
Choosing the right locations for fast-food, quick-serve, gas, and convenience
store businesses becomes an art after you have done it time and again and en-
joyed success and experienced failures. I discussed above in the numbers analy-
sis section the importance of counting heads and checking competitors’ sales. I
also stressed that the visibility of any site is a key part of this location issue.
And finally I emphasized being in an area where the demographics support
your product, where it is both needed and wanted by the people. Remember,
will the dogs like it? For as simple as those concepts seem, be assured that you
cannot properly analyze any real estate deal involving commercial sales to the
public without paying close attention to these basic principles of site selection.
Take it from someone who has learned these lessons the hard way.
In most cases, the location you want and are sure of is easy to figure out but
is unavailable because of zoning, expense, public ownership, size (too big to af-
ford or too small to be workable), and/or access. The locations that are available
often are available because no one wants them or can afford them. This is espe-
cially true in major metro areas. If the site is available, you’d better go slow be-
cause usually there is something wrong with it. Never assume your competitors
are dumb or lazy. Proceed with caution or you will build the perfect store and
nobody will come.
I can’t tell you how many times I have fortunately passed on real estate deals
that were just about right, meaning just about in a great location, but were
slightly off for one reason or another. Maybe the site was just interior from the
key dominant corner or was in a perfect corner location but on the second floor
or down a half-flight of stairs. Or the site was blocked by a huge banyan tree,
ticket booth, adjacent building, or some other obstruction so you couldn’t see it
from the “coming home” side of the road. I will assure you that you can’t build
or manage your way out of a poor location, no matter how hard you try or how
much you spend. I refer here to my area of expertise involving quick-serve
restaurants and convenience/gas facilities; however, I believe this location issue
is at the heart of every deal that involves sales to the general public.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 211
You can’t build or manage your way out of a poor location, no matter
how hard you try or how much you spend.
Aside from location visibility, access for your customers is another important
consideration. I have thankfully passed on a number of sites that seemed per-
fectly located but suffered from limited access because of traffic, traffic controls,
or limited parking. If it’s not convenient the “dogs” will pass on by to someplace
that’s easier to deal with. So, if you build on a location that your customers can’t
get to, they won’t come.
My partner, Robert Pulley, and I had some fantastic successes by securing
locations that were seemingly unavailable or unattainable for our quick-serve
hamburger restaurants. I mentioned above the Waikiki location with the prob-
lematic ticket booth. Once we got rid of this visual impairment we had an ab-
solute grade “A” location. We had many other successes that I like to think
were enabled by creative thinking and action.
When I was looking for deals that would compete favorably with my number-
one competitor, McDonald’s, I had to be creative since this competitor had seem-
ingly tied up all the available, really good locations. I always laughed when a
real estate broker would tell me that I was ahead of McDonald’s on any particular
site or that I was being offered the site first. I assumed, usually with complete
accuracy, that any site McDonald’s wanted in my city would end up in their
hands no matter who else was interested. They were definitely the “big kahuna”
in my development area, and they usually got the first right of refusal on any
newly available sites. I guess it’s good to be the real boss.
So I, along with my partner, had to think creatively if we were going to grow
and succeed. Our deal analysis on sites had to be not only accurate but innova-
tive. This creative mind-set led us to open the first nationally branded fast-food
outlet ever in a U.S. military installation at the Navy Exchange at Pearl Harbor,
Hawai’i. (We lost this location some years later when we sold out to a Japanese
company, but that is another story.) We opened, with great success, the first
fast-food restaurant with a partner in the Honolulu International Airport, and
we opened the first national fast-food franchise operation in a Hawai’i public
park at Ala Moana park in downtown Honolulu. We actually retrofitted part of
a YMCA building to create a Burger King restaurant next to the University of
Hawai’i, which was another first.
We definitely had to be creative in our site selection to survive and grow our
company. We actually built five or more of the most successful restaurants in
TIP
212 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 213
terms of sales volume in the history of quick-serve restaurants. In every case,
the successful location was equal or superior to our competitors’ locations or
was uniquely situated to avoid any competition. In every case, the location was
the key to our success. Our deal analysis was spot-on in these unique locations.
However, I would be less than honest if I didn’t tell you about a couple of
bad experiences I’ve had because of poor site selection. By that I mean, I built
it and they didn’t come. The first example involved building a very fancy and
expensive Burger King restaurant on the ground floor of a high-end residential
condominium that my partner had developed in Waikiki. Honestly, my site
(deal) analysis was skewed by the ready availability of this commercial site,
which my partner had in his back pocket as the condominium developer. What
I didn’t see were some major problems with this “captive site,” although it was
located on a busy Waikiki corner. First, the dogs didn’t like it. The homeowners
were less than enamored by a fast-food hamburger restaurant at the entrance
to their new, exclusive, and expensive condominium complex. To add further
insult, a fellow high-end restaurant tenant sued to stop our restaurant’s con-
struction as a violation of his exclusivity clause. But the real oversight in our
deal analysis was that our location was on the busy corner but one-half floor
below street grade. The walk-by traffic didn’t seem to find our location because
it was below their sight line. A final straw was that, even though there were
hundreds of cars passing by every hour, there was no parking.
Here’s a lesson I learned that is for everyone: If you are in the convenience
food/store business you had better be convenient and readily accessible. I have
never had much success in this quick-serve/convenience area when I locate
below or above street level. So in analyzing site locations, don’t count on too
much tenacity or insight on the part of your customers—they just don’t care
that much.
In analyzing site locations don’t count on too much tenacity or insight
on the part of your customers—they just don’t care that much.
My experience in developing, owning, and operating a nightclub was equally
painful. In this instance, a close personal friend, Robert Mardian Jr., had given
me some solid advice against building this club on the Big Island of Hawai’i. He
was in the club business there, as well, and knew the ropes. Unfortunately, I ig-
nored that good advice and proceeded with the nightclub development. My
reason for going forward was simply that I had space in a warehouse complex
TIP
that I owned, which had already been substantially built out as a nightclub at
great expense. I recaptured the space after my tenant defaulted (that should
have been my first clue), and I decided the best idea was to finish out the club
and operate it. So I spent hundreds of thousands of dollars building a state-of-
the-art nightclub that opened with considerable fanfare. Unfortunately, I soon
found out that, even if the dogs liked the club, they wouldn’t come if they
couldn’t find it.
Another important and costly lesson I learned is that you can’t
turn a sow’s ear into a silk purse.
I had committed two major mistakes here concerning location. I had failed
to heed the clear and sound advice from a knowledgeable consultant who ad-
vised me that the club would fail because of location. Also, I should have
known that no matter how much money you spend, you cannot build yourself
out of a bad location. This just wasn’t appropriate space for a nightclub be-
cause it was in the back of an industrial warehouse that was off the beaten
track. People who actually wanted to come couldn’t find it. I used to joke that
people just needed to drive until they heard gunfire (this was a rough area
late at night). I ended up disliking the nightclub business as much as the ceme-
tery business.
By now I think you get it. Deals where the location is “bad, bad, and bad”
won’t work no matter what you do. We finally tore out the nightclub improve-
ments and returned it to warehouse use. The entire complex has been full since.
Another important and costly lesson I learned is that you can’t turn a sow’s ear
into a silk purse.
Build It and They Will Come (or Not)
• Location, location, location is true, true, and true.
• Count heads, review access and visibility, and check out the competition.
• If the site is readily available there is probably something wrong with it.
• Think “outside the box” to get unique locations.
• If you are in the convenience business you’d better be convenient.
• Seek out and listen to the experts.
• Don’t try to turn a sow’s ear into a silk purse.
TIP
214 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Trouble with Travel
With any deal you are considering, you simply have to ask yourself, “Can I man-
age the deal effectively? If the deal is located more than one day’s travel from
your home, you’d better ask (and answer) some serious questions about your
personal span of control. You can’t manage the type of deals I have been dis-
cussing by staring at a computer. You need to be at the site at least weekly if you
are the majority partner. Or you’d better have a good, capable, and trustworthy
operator/partner.
And that leads to an important point. One of the most important considera-
tions in analyzing whether to proceed with any real estate deal or development
is the availability of good management. And usually the key to good management
is your personal involvement in the development and operation. Having good
partners can solve many of the concerns about good management; however, if
your own money is at risk in any deal it will require your personal attention.
The question then is whether realistically you will actually be able to devote
sufficient time to a deal to make it successful.
One of the most important considerations in analyzing whether to
proceed with any real estate deal or development is the availability of good
management. And, usually that means you, with direct personal involvement
in the development and operation.
I have found if a deal or operation is located too far from my home base or is
difficult to get to, I won’t pay enough personal oversight and attention to the
situation to ensure good management. I have also found that it is very rare to
see any deal run on its own without major problems. If I have to get on an air-
plane or drive several hours to a location, you are not going to see me very often.
It really amounts to the trouble with travel.
I once stretched the limit concerning my effective span of control by agreeing
to be a founding member of a company formed to develop Subway sandwich
restaurants in the old Soviet Union. Before we got the first restaurant built, the
Soviet Union imploded, so we had to be satisfied with the nation of Russia with
only 300 million people or so. My major point here is that you don’t need to
travel to the other side of the world to find trouble. You can usually find plenty
of trouble right at home.
How I ever got involved in Soviet Subway restaurants is a story of seduction.
I was intoxicated by the sheer potential magnitude of a deal that involved an
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 215
entire nation, despite the fact that it happened to be Russia—a mere 12,500
miles from my home. The prevalent “kleptocracy” that seemed to be the domi-
nant ideology in the early nineties in Russia should have raised a cautionary
note in my Russia deal analysis. The fact that I would have very little to do with
day-to-day management of the restaurants should also have raised my personal
red flag. Despite these serious road blocks to good deal formation, I along with
some other U.S. partners built the first Subway sandwich restaurant in Russia
on Nevsky Prospect in St. Petersburg. It took some real creativity and out-of-
the-box thinking to build a workable and visible restaurant in a two-hundred-
year-old building.
The restaurant was a rousing success primarily because I sent one of my
very best partners from Hawai’i, Steve Brown, along with his wife, Roberta, to
build and run the Russian Subway operations. Of course, Steve was also enam-
ored with the prospect of owning part of the hundred or more Subway Restau-
rants we intended to build throughout Russia, so I am not entirely to blame for
disrupting his life. Shockingly, we were taking in wheelbarrow loads of rubles
(literally) and lots of hard currency (dollars, marks, etc.) from the very start of
operations in St. Petersburg. Under Steve’s management with some help from
me and the other three principals, we had one of the most successful Subway
sandwich restaurants in the world—for about three months.
After weeks of hard work and success, Steve and Roberta finally took a short
trip out of Russia to decompress, leaving one of our partners in charge as the
managing director, which was required by Russian corporate law. Call it confu-
sion about travel plans and return dates, but we had literally one day without a
so-called managing director in charge of operations in St. Petersburg. Our Russ-
ian partner, whom we took on at the outset of our plans because of his apparent
control over some key real estate and his political connections, chose that day
to make his move. He had been sitting on the sidelines as we operated for ninety
days without any active part in management. He expressed great frustration
that we were banking all our net receipts to pay start-up bills before making
any partner distributions. What we didn’t realize at the time, was that our part-
ner had some very bad characters who had control over him and were part of a
major Russian mob.
Under mob instructions (we think), he was waiting for his chance to gain
control over the restaurant as managing director. He seized that one day’s op-
portunity. When Steve Brown returned from Russia a day later he found our
Russian partner’s security people (formerly our security people, ex-KGB ap-
parently) in charge. They literally ran Steve out of the restaurant at gunpoint!
216 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
So we lost control of the restaurant
and the backing we had lined up to
build many more restaurants. And
our Russian “partner” soon ran the
existing restaurant into the ground.
Talk about a mess!
Despite the fact that our company
finally got the restaurant back years
later, we all lost most of our invest-
ment in this deal. Now we may ulti-
mately get back some of our money
as my old U.S. partners continue to
build Subway sandwich restaurants
through franchise agreements in Russia under the auspices of our former com-
pany. However, I have often reflected on my poor decision in getting involved in
a deal so far from home and on hazardous turf we knew little about. I can’t help
but repeat that you don’t need to travel halfway around the world to invest your
way into trouble; there are plenty of landmines to step on right here at home.
Deals Are Like Parachutes
So far, we’ve covered many of the considerations involved in analyzing and ne-
gotiating good deals. Now let’s discuss the importance of getting out of a bad or
marginal deal. Think of deals as if they were parachutes. If you’re freefalling or
sinking fast, you need to be able to pull the rip cord to save yourself and get out
of a deal that’s simply not working. That means first and foremost, determine
whether you can negotiate an “out” clause in your initial deal analysis. If you
don’t succeed in obtaining this concession from the landlord/seller you may
want to pass on the deal.
When I first started building restaurants, my partner and I routinely signed
personal guaranties on leases for long-term leasehold properties. We were reach-
ing to obtain the best real estate available and believed, in many cases correctly,
that we had no chance to obtain these superior sites without “kissing the paper,”
which is another way of saying signing personal guaranties. We ultimately
stopped doing this since a personal guaranty on a long-term lease is like a life
sentence. If the lease term is long enough you have to worry about whether the
lease rent is being paid for the rest of your life. This is especially true if you
have assigned this lease to someone else.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 217
The Trouble With Travel
• The trouble with travel is that it
reduces your span of control.
• Will you actually go there after you
have built it?
• Deals don’t run on their own.
• Foreign countries are especially
dangerous turf.
• You don’t have to leave home to
find trouble.
Although we ultimately got our names off most of these guaranties when we
sold the restaurants and assigned these long-term leases, in some instances we
could not get releases because the landlords were just too tough. And, our
marker (guaranty) was called in a couple of times by landlords who we had no
dealings with for years. So, if a personal guaranty is demanded, you must care-
fully consider whether you want to accept this liability for the term of the lease
(or loan). This extra liability greatly burdens the benefit of any potential deal
and should be factored into your deal decision making.
If a personal guaranty is demanded, you must carefully consider
whether you want to accept this liability for the term of the lease or loan—
a potential life sentence.
After a couple of bad experiences, I not only stopped giving my personal
guaranty on lease deals, but I began to insist on “rip cord” clauses to get out of
leases that proved to be for marginal locations. In most instances, landlords
met this demand for an “out” of a long-term real estate lease with stiff resistance
or refusal. My resolve to leave a par-
tially open door to get out of a bad
deal was equally strong. My negoti-
ating stance was to point out that I
would be fronting significant im-
provement costs at the outset, which
I would not walk away from without
a really compelling reason. Some-
times I was able to negotiate only a
qualified release from my personal
guaranty, which was better than
nothing. For example, my personal
guaranty would go away after the rent had been paid for a short term of three
to five years or on payment of a lump sum. But I was always prepared to walk
away from deals that were just too tough in terms of personal guaranties or
long-term lock-ins.
Make My Day, Make My Life
At some point in every viable real estate deal you have the opportunity, or at
least the consideration, of whether or not to sell. In my experience, the decision
TIP
218 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Deals Are Like
Parachutes
• A long-term personal guaranty can
amount to a “life-sentence.”
• Negotiate a “rip cord” clause in
long-term leases if possible.
• Be prepared to “walk” if terms are
too tough.
to sell or not to sell is usually an easy or obvious one. If the price is right, every-
thing is for sale. The analysis issue is which course of action—sale or retention—
will optimize the return from your deal. I have personally made some great
selling decisions and also some pretty bad decisions that irk me to this day.
Generally speaking, there are certain rules of thumb that are commonly used
in the sale of operating businesses. Of course, these rules can be warped in a
hundred different ways to accommodate the unique features of every different
deal. Fast-food restaurants often sell based on a ratio of annual (trailing twelve-
month) cash flow. Six times annual cash flow is generally considered at the
high-end while four-and-a-half times cash flow is considered at the low-end of
selling prices for such operating businesses. And, my reference to cash-flow re-
ally more correctly refers to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and
amortization, or EBITDA. There are other variations of this cash-flow acronym,
but this is the one I use.
There are certain rules of thumb that are commonly used in the
sale of operating businesses. Of course, these rules can be warped in
a hundred different ways to accommodate the unique features of every
different deal.
Of course, operating businesses are sold for all kinds of reasons and all kinds
of prices. I remember an old legend concerning the sale of a gas station/conve-
nience store. Essentially, the owner of this business was a sharp operator who
was trying to push the sales price beyond normal cash-flow rules of thumb. So
every time a potential buyer was due to inspect the business, the owner would
dump trash around the buildings, leave the restrooms in a mess, and generally
present an untidy, dirty appearance about the business. Then when the buyer
showed up, the owner would take him aside and point out the seemingly obvious
fact that if someone would “just run the business properly” sales and profits
would soar. It is also common for the owner/seller and spouse to add back to
the cash flow their salaries (car allowance, expense account, etc.) to pump up
the cash flow. This is true, even if the owner/seller and spouse are the very
heart of the business management and operation. Owners play all kinds of
games with the sale of operating businesses. More sophisticated buyers and
sellers will rely on industry norms concerning cash flow and a real objective
analysis of the numbers to arrive at a price.
Robert Pulley and I sold our Burger King restaurants in Hawai’i at a price
that approached one times the gross sales, which probably doesn’t happen very
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 219
220 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
often. However, we had a business in the seemingly terrific state of Hawai’i, we
had good management and good locations, and we had enthusiastic foreign
buyers. The analysis of whether to sell or not in our case was an easy yes. I have
sold restaurants at other times on the six-times cash flow multiple, but I per-
sonally have not seen another deal with a price approaching parity with gross
sales.
Analyzing the deal in raw land sales, presuming one has staying power to
hold on to the land, relates basically to the greed factor. How much gain is
enough? There are no real rules of thumb concerning the sale of raw land or
development land. You need to make the hard decision of whether holding the
land or the further development of the land will justify holding costs. Of course,
these decisions to sell raw land are often driven by the owner’s inability to con-
tinue to pay carrying costs. In cases where you are going to lose the property
otherwise, selling becomes an easy decision.
My most memorable mistakes in terms of selling prematurely involve selling
houses in Hawai’i that practically doubled in value a year or two after my sale.
We all have had or know of examples of seller’s remorse in personal house sales.
This was particularly true in many areas of the United States that were experi-
encing explosive increases in house prices. I, along with lots of other sellers,
failed to judge the rapid upward move of the market.
Of course failure to sell during market peak can be an equally grievous error.
We also have become familiar with holding strategies that lead to dramatic
losses in rapidly declining residential and commercial real estate markets.
There are factors other than price that may impact the decision to sell or to
buy. You might decide to sell if you no longer are able to manage a business or
take care of a house. You may know of planned major infrastructure changes
that will impact the relevant market negatively or positively. You might want to
Make My Day, Make My Life
• Utilize common “rules of thumb” to reach a realistic valuation decision.
• Cash flow rather than assets determine sales prices (usually).
• Unless you have a “crystal ball,” you can get burned on market directions (up or
down).
• If you can’t afford the deal you need to sell it.
• Don’t miss a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to sell; i.e., the “make my day, make
my life” decision.
sell to key employees to avoid losing them. In every case, the analysis of the
deal, or the sale, requires every bit as much consideration as a deal to build or
acquire.
Ways To Learn More
Look for future writings by John Finney on the adventures on real estate.
Rich Dad Poor Dad, by Robert Kiyosaki
ABC’s of Real Estate Investing, by Ken McElroy
John Finney is the current president of Industrial Income Properties,
Inc., a company he formed to find, develop, own, and operate real estate,
ranging from residential and office condominiums, cattle ranches, fast-
food restaurants with adjunct convenience store and gas facilities, single
family residences, farm properties, nightclubs, and other real estate ven-
tures in Hawai’i, Guam, and the western United States. Prior to that, he
and his partner Robert W. Pulley secured the Burger King franchise rights in Hawai’i and in
ten years opened thirty-five stores and sold them in one of the biggest deals in Burger King
history. And each has had many other real estate ventures in the United States. John is an
attorney and a graduate of Stanford Law School and a former U.S. Marine.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 221
Imet Scott in 1999 at the Phoenix Open golf event. I knew of his reputation as
one of the biggest mortgage bankers in Arizona, but I did not know that he
knew me. Smiling as he walked up, he said, “I’m glad you’re saying what you say
about stocks and mutual funds. They’re terrible investments.”
At the time, I was under blistering attacks from financial planners and financial
magazines that were supported by mutual fund company’s advertising dollars.
You may recall that in 1999, the stock market was red hot and people believed they
were making billions in the new economy of the dot-com world. So to have a person
of Scott’s reputation back up my philosophy that stocks and mutual funds were
risky investments was a welcome relief and validation. His pat on my back made
watching the Phoenix Open even more enjoyable.
Today Scott is one of the three mortgage bankers I call when I need the straight
story about real estate financing. It was Scott who, years ago, warned me of the
real estate bubble being formed by the sub-prime mortgage fiasco. It was because
of Scott that my wife, Kim, and I became more conservative in our real estate in-
vestments while others became real estate gamblers.
I’m an advocate for financial education because when you get smarter, you
minimize risk. That’s what this chapter is about. Scott has made me smarter, and
12 Scott D. McPHERSON
Real Estate Due Diligence
222
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 223
the knowledge he has shared with me minimizes my risk with every new invest-
ment I make. His wisdom in this chapter will do the same for you.
—Robert Kiyosaki
When talking about the subject of real estate due diligence, you are really talking
about nothing more than a team effort of discovery and verification. That’s
what due diligence is, and every real estate transaction you do, whether it is a
single family home purchase or a very complex commercial real estate devel-
opment, will require the buyer to take certain fundamental steps of underwrit-
ing. Only through that process can a buyer fully assess all aspects of the property
he or she is purchasing. And if you are the buyer, you’ll want to make sure you
are diligent about due diligence.
Benjamin Franklin once said, “Diligence is the mother of good luck.”
When you as a real estate investor have identified a property that you want
to purchase, you have come to the conclusion to buy it based on a series of some-
what superficial facts. You have usually seen the property, and generally have
reviewed some of the financial information that the seller or broker has provided
you. And based on this information and your belief that the property fits your
business plan, you make an offer to purchase. Once the seller has accepted your
offer, your work—or should I say your team’s work—has just begun!
I am a real believer in putting together a very strong team when you approach
a real estate acquisition. Many of the authors in this book have stated the exact
same thing in their chapters. The fact is, most highly successful people or com-
panies are built using a team approach to getting things done. No one can be an
expert on every aspect of real estate, and frankly if you are investing on behalf
of other people and are using their money, you should always seek competent
third-party input.
In this chapter, I am going to walk you through a due diligence process and
give you an overview of why the various members of your team are important. I
am also going to include my Eight Tips and some real-life examples of why se-
curing qualified and unbiased advice on your proposed acquisition is so critical.
To me, assembling a team to assist you with your due diligence is just like
putting a puzzle together. Each of the team members have separate and spe-
cialized disciplines, but when they are brought together by you as the leader,
TIP
the pieces come together, and all of a
sudden the full picture comes to life.
You can see what you are really buying!
I have separated the due diligence
process into five main categories: phys-
ical review, legal, title, third party re-
ports, and accounting tax. Let’s start
with the first one on this list.
Physical Review
During the physical review, you and your team inspect the property to see if it
falls in line with your business plan and your expectations. Let me expand a bit
on this. As an example, let’s say that you are planning to buy an apartment
building and then do some slight renovations to the units that will allow you to
increase the rents over the next couple of years. So how does the process start?
Before you make your offer to purchase the property, you will want to inter-
view and select a property management company to help you prepare your op-
erating and renovation budgets for the property. The key word here is before!
This is not something you want to do after you make the offer. The results of
this work will help you decide whether the property is worth making an offer
at all.
If you are going to be a professional real estate investor, have your
team lined up before you make the offer!
A successful and competent property management company can go over
your operating and renovation budgets to make sure they are realistic and give
you credible feedback on all the previous assumptions you may have made on
the property—assumptions such as operating expense savings, new income op-
portunities, and even cash flow projections. They can look at your business plan
and give it a thumbs up or a thumbs down and help you adjust it so it is attain-
able and realistic. Remember, you will rely on a property management company
to make your business plan work, so you had better make sure you are both on
the same page from the beginning.
The property management company will have its own sub checklists for its
own due diligence process. The people in the company will walk through every
TIP
224 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Due Diligence Process
Categories
• Physical Review
• Legal Review
• Title Review
• Third Party Reports Review
• Accounting and Tax Review
apartment and check the condition of the property in a multifamily project, for
example, and bring in the sub-trades such as roofing companies, landscape com-
panies, etc., that can provide detailed reports on the condition of the property.
In addition to spearheading the physical inspection, the property manage-
ment company will also review all the rent-rolls, the operating statements, and
tenant profiles, all in an effort to gain an understanding of the true, current op-
erating income of the property. Usually it will present you with a summary of
the findings.
The property management company is a critical member of your team.
Find the best one you can and work closely with it.
I cannot tell you how many times during my career that this work and the
report that it generates has helped buyers make the right decision about a prop-
erty. Let me give you an example from two perspectives. I was involved in a
twenty-unit apartment community that I was going to buy and convert to for-
sale condominiums. When we did our walk-through, my property management
company brought along several contractors who were going to do the work on
the project once I closed.
To convert the apartments to condominiums, I planned to put about $20,000
of renovations—including adding a washer and dryer—into each unit. This was
a non-negotiable expense since my market study indicated that other condo
projects in the market all had washers and dryers. We needed to be competitive.
After the inspection, the owner of the property management company called
me and said that everything checked out and there were no real surprises, ex-
cept one. I asked, “What would that be?” He proceeded to tell me that his
plumber and framer felt that because of the existing plumbing and stairwell
configuration, putting in the washers and dryers would cost an additional five
thousand dollars per unit. That added up to an additional $100,000. OUCH!
Well clearly, that unexpected expense was not in my budget, so I went back
to the seller to renegotiate the terms of the deal. Specifically, I agreed to remove
all contingencies after the completion of my due diligence, and in exchange I
requested that the seller reduce the price by $100,000. He agreed. Having an
expert in the room saved me $100,000! For as valuable as the property man-
agement company was in finding a potentially deal-breaking hidden cost, a
property manager can also add strong value by reviewing the rent-roll and ten-
ant profiles.
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 225
Here’s my story: I was financing an acquisition of a large apartment building
in Scottsdale, Arizona, that had been grossly undermanaged. My client was go-
ing to buy the asset and renovate the units and gradually raise rents. He thought
the quoted street rents for this property were below market for the submarket
and felt he could increase them once he renovated the exterior, improved the
amenities, and did some minor interior work.
What the property management company reported after reviewing the rent-
roll was both startling and exciting. They discovered that more than 25 percent
of the existing tenants had not received a rental increase since they signed their
original leases! Two tenants were actually paying the same rent they had paid
when they moved into the property the day it opened . . . fifteen years prior!
This news meant that the property’s net operating income would indeed in-
crease significantly simply by raising the old rents to the current market rates
and once the additional rent kicked in, based on the planned property improve-
ments. The property management company earned its keep that day.
Legal Review
Hiring a lawyer that practices real estate law is a must. I am not advocating
that you spend an incredible amount of money on legal fees, but with complex
issues regarding title, contracts, entitlements, lender documents, and other
items that you are certain to run into, you’d better have a good lawyer on your
team. If you are an experienced real estate investor and you are buying a home
or something without too many issues, maybe you can handle the transaction
on your own. But regardless, the legal review phase is not the place to save
money on professional fees.
In my experience, if you have a good lawyer who is a “deal maker” you should
get him or her engaged on the issues he/she knows best. I have seen some prob-
lems arise when the lawyer becomes the negotiator for the transaction. Re-
member you are the team leader, and all of the members should be reporting to
you. That’s when a lawyer, as well as all your other team members, can really
add value. There are many examples of how lawyers have added value in the
numerous transactions in which I have been involved. Let me share a favorite.
I was financing both the debt and equity for a condo developer on a property
in Portland, Oregon. My borrower hired a much-respected lawyer in Portland
to review all title and entitlement documents regarding the property. He dis-
covered during the title review that one of the owners had recorded a document
226 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
requiring his approval before a property could be converted to condominiums.
Without this owner’s approval there was no way to get the state real estate ap-
proval to sell the units individually, and no way to deliver clear title to the buyers!
My borrower could not close the transaction without having this provision
removed from the title. The only solution was to go back to this previous owner
and get that person to remove the provision. Guess what? The previous owner
was willing to comply, but for a price. My buyer was paying $48 million for a
property that he was going to convert to condominiums and that he now dis-
covered would not close until this provision was cleared up.
In this case, our seller and the previous seller agreed to a settlement, and we
closed the transaction at no additional cost to my buyer. Thankfully, my client’s
lawyer had reviewed the documents thoroughly and was on top of this issue.
This is the purpose of legal due diligence: finding the problems before they be-
come insurmountable and providing you with the knowledge you need to make
a go/no-go decision based on the findings and the proposed solutions. Just
think if my buyer had closed on the property and then found out that he could
not convert the property at all. Or worse yet, imagine the cost to remove the re-
striction post closing! My buyer would have been at the complete mercy of the
previous owner.
I do recommend strongly that if you are getting into larger and more
complex transactions that require new debt or joint venture equity that you get
legal representation at all times.
I am primarily a commercial mortgage broker. I provide debt and equity for
commercial real estate transactions around the country. I can tell you that loan
documents and joint venture agreements are extremely complex, and you do
need someone who can thoroughly understand them and explain them to you.
Title Review
Just as it’s important to work with a lawyer you know and trust during the legal
due diligence review, it’s just as important to work with a title company you
know and trust for this part of the process. In any deal I do, I try to control the
title company choice in the purchase contract if at all possible. I find it best to
go with a larger firm that has the capacity to provide a satisfactory level of in-
surance coverage for all parties.
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 227
Using a title company that you know and one that is acceptable to your
lenders and lawyer will save you a lot of time and effort.
I also like to use title companies to search comparable sales, foreclosures, or
other owners in a particular area to help give you a feel of what is going on in the
vicinity around the property. This is important intelligence you’ll need as you
formulate your marketing plans and your forecasts for a particular property.
Lawyers aren’t the only ones who can save the day when it comes to due
diligence. Let me give you an example of how a title company made me a quick
profit on a house I was buying. The year was 1987, and the home was in Paradise
Valley, Arizona. It was kind of a hidden jewel. I saw a sign on it one morning
when I was jogging and decided to make a call. The house was small, but sat on
two and a half acres surrounded by four other houses on five acres. I knew
homes with that kind of acreage were not common, so I thought there might be
value in this property.
When I got the broker on the line, he said his mother had passed away and
they needed to sell the house quickly. They were asking $225,000 and would
carry some amount for a quick close. I offered $185,000 that day, and they ac-
cepted my offer. That gave me thirty days to close and find the money!
Working with the title company, I asked them to pull up all the sales in the
surrounding area so I could see who my neighbors were and how much they
paid for their properties. What I discovered was that about five of the ten sur-
rounding properties had changed hands in the last twelve months. Then I noticed
something even more interesting about the sales. Each one was in a different
name or entity, but they all had the same mailing address for the tax bills.
BINGO! The light went on that someone had been assembling these larger
properties. I went to the address on the tax rolls and found out the entity was a
land development company in town. Furthermore, I read in the paper that this
land development company had just signed the Ritz Carlton and was going to
announce a resort hotel development shortly!
Thanks to the information from my title company, I now knew that I was
just about to close on a piece of property that the land development company
needed to complete the assemblage for their planned resort development. After
I closed on the house, I set up a meeting with the development company and
subsequently sold them the property for $375,000. A whopping $150,000 more
than I paid for it! On top of that windfall, I negotiated free rent to live in the
house for one year. Remember what wise old Ben said: “Diligence is the mother
of good luck.”
TIP
228 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Third Party Reports Review
This is another crucial part of the due diligence process. The third party reports
that I am talking about are primarily the Environmental, Property Conditions,
Appraisal, and Market Study. You may or may not need them based on the type
of property you are buying, but in most cases they are good to get and even may
be required by your lender. Let’s start at the top of the list.
Environmental
I would highly recommend that you hire a company to provide you with an en-
vironmental study on the property. This report looks at soil composition, haz-
ardous materials, and the like. Typically you contract for a Phase 1 report, which
is affordable, approximately in the $2,000 to $3,000 range. This report is well
worth the expense if the company turns something up like toxicity in the soil
or some other hazardous materials.
The downside risk is way too large not to spend the money on a Phase 1
environmental report. Do one, no matter what.
If you are using a conventional financing source, your lender will require a
Phase 1 report. They often have an approved list of vendors, so I recommend
that you check with your lender before you hire a provider to do this work. If
you do not have a lender yet, you should hire a national company that has affil-
iates in your region, then ask them for a list of lenders they have done business
with.
Property Conditions Report
A property conditions report does just as the name states. It will call out issues
with the property’s condition that the inspections reveal. This would include
structural issues, roofs, asphalt, sewer, and other building systems. The report
also will give you an estimated useful life for those items. This is very important
when you are capitalizing your budget.
The property conditions report gives you a second opinion on the
condition of the property and can either affirm/dispute the inspection
findings that you and your property management firm did earlier. Or it can
find something you both have overlooked. That’s important to know.
TIP
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 229
When it comes to costs, property conditions reports can be all over the board,
but this is no place to skimp. Not only do you want a firm that is experienced
and knowledgeable, you want to hire a firm that has a national presence and is
acceptable to your lender if you know who that is. As I mentioned earlier, if you
have not yet chosen a lender, your inspection company may be able to help with
a recommendation.
The other benefit of having a property conditions report is that it is a third
party report and completely unbiased, in contrast to the report compiled by
your property management company. If you go back to the seller with your
property management report, asking the seller to pay for something that is
wrong with the property, he or she may feel that the report is biased in your fa-
vor. That’s hard to do when you are also holding a third party property condition
report that reflects the exact same issue. This report gives you much more cred-
ibility and negotiating power.
Appraisal
Depending on how sophisticated a real estate investor you are, you may not
think you need an appraisal. My advice is almost always to get one. If you are fi-
nancing your project, you will need one anyway, and why not be sure that the
property is valued where you believe it to be? It validates your own assessments,
or in some cases refutes them. Either way, the knowledge is good to have.
As the borrower, it can get a little dicey if you hire the appraiser. Federally
chartered banks have guidelines that they must adhere to. One of those guide-
lines is that the borrower cannot order the appraisal. Most banks and nonbank
lenders are more comfortable making the decision on whom to hire. What I do
in those instances is let the mortgage broker hire the appraiser or go to the
lender with an appraiser in mind and let him hire that person. I generally want
some say in the appraiser.
The mistake I see the most is when appraisers are hired and they are inex-
perienced in the type of property the buyer is purchasing. I run into this quite a
bit with banks. They just send out a bid sheet to three appraisers and hire one
not necessarily based on his expertise but on his time availability and price. A
bad appraisal can bring the entire transaction to a standstill in a second.
To avoid this I always suggest having one or two appraisers that are good at
what they do and qualified in your type of property that you can recommend to
the bank. I also recommend that you take the time, or let your mortgage broker
take the time, to share your vision of the property with the appraiser. If the ap-
praiser does not see the value that you currently see or are going to create, you
230 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
are toast. Finally, be proactive with him and provide him with as much infor-
mation as you can.
Remember an appraisal is an opinion of value. You may have, and are
entitled to have, your own opinion, but you’d better be ready to back it up.
Market Study
Usually the appraisal will contain a good discussion of the market for your type
of property. However if you are planning to do something a little more on the
edge or something that is complex like a condo conversion, hotel, golf course,
or some kind of unique single family project, for example, you may need an ad-
ditional market study not only for your own knowledge but to help move your
ideas forward with the people around you.
There are companies, both regional and national, that can do market studies
geared directly toward your kind of project and just about any other kind of
project including ones I mentioned in the previous paragraph. Consider engag-
ing them to do the report and show it to everyone who you think needs to see
it. What I mean by that is show your market study to clarify and support your
vision and to defend your position.
Show your market study to clarify and support your vision and to
defend your position.
Warning—these market reports can be expensive. It is common to see them
run in the $10,000 to $30,000 range. But at times, they are worth their weight
in gold. I have successfully used these types of reports to argue the assumptions
used in an appraisal that came in low. Again, it is much easier to argue your
points on absorption, price points, rents, etc., when you have a credible third-
party report supporting you.
Accounting and Tax Review
This is the last review on our list, and it is the one that can make you very happy
at tax time. Having an excellent real estate and tax accountant on your side is
critical. You are going to have to make decisions prior to closing the transaction
and post closing, and the advice you need can come only from people who make
their living understanding and staying on top of complex tax code. Prior to
TIP
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 231
232 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
closing, they can work with your lawyer to develop the best ownership structure
for you and/or your partners. Is it an LLC? A corporation? And how should it
be structured? It matters because as you learned in the chapter on entity struc-
tures in this book, these decisions have tax implications. Post closing, your tax
accountant can file the K-1 forms (the form used to report each owner’s share
of income and certain expense items) and perform audits if necessary.
If you do not have a good real estate and tax accountant, get one.
One of the great benefits of being in the mortgage brokerage business is that
I get to see amazing real estate projects and have the privilege of helping very
creative entrepreneurs put those real estate projects together. I have learned
much more from their good practices and bad decisions than I ever did in school
or in my own real estate investment career.
Real estate is a magical way to use leverage to your advantage and develop
sustainable wealth. With that as a premise, it also requires you have a profes-
sional focus that not only sees the big picture or vision but also forces you to
pay attention to the details.
All real estate involves taking risks. The difference between the professional
investor and the amateur is that the real professional tries to manage this risk
by surrounding himself or herself with an incredible team that adds value at
every turn. Property due diligence is one of those turns and it is too critical to
just roll the dice!
Scott McPherson is a principal and cofounder of a highly specialized
real estate finance company called Capital Advisory Group, LC. Estab-
lished in 2001, the firm has successfully closed around $3.5 billion of
structured debt and equity in the United States. Scott has financed every-
thing from raw land to high-rise condominium towers from Portland, Ore-
gon, to Tampa, Florida, and has successfully sourced and closed multiple
projects in excess of $100 million in cost. For more information, visit www.capitaladvisory
group.us.
TIP
Ioften refer to Kim Dalton as the chameleon. She is the interior designer my
wife, Kim, and I hired to be a member of our design team—a team of profes-
sionals that included our architect, general contractor, landscape architect, and
interior designer. I describe Kim Dalton as a chameleon because there were days I
did not recognize her. She would show up at the job site completely transformed
with a totally different look and a totally different energy. She would change as
the nature of the project changed. She was that flexible, and design flexibility is
essential for an interior designer.
Today, when people walk into our home or our business offices, they often say
“ooooh” and “aaaah” because the impact of Kim’s work is powerful, yet subtle.
Kim’s input to our projects is priceless. Not only does she increase the immediate
sales value of our projects, her work gives our home and business environment
warmth. Her work increases our desire to stay at home and also to be at work.
As a professional real estate investor, I think there is nothing worse than a mul-
timillion dollar project that goes cheap on interior design. I have been in homes,
condos, and commercial projects where the developer went cheap or went boring,
leaving the interior design up to him or his wife. Rather than inspire a sale, cheap
and tacky interior design can drive buyers away. You’d be surprised how inexpen-
sive coats of paint in different or unique shades can make a $100,000 project look
13Kim DALTON
Creating Value from
the Inside Out
233
like a million dollar project. That is why Kim Dalton’s professional design touch is
essential to our success in real estate.
—Robert Kiyosaki
P erhaps I’m biased, but I consider interior design to be an essential part of
real estate investing. Whether you are planning a spec home, preparing
an existing home for resale, rehabilitating a multifamily complex, or renovat-
ing a commercial property, appropriate interior design can always help to in-
crease the value of a property. It can also dramatically shorten your sales
cycle. Thoughtful interior design will carefully organize space while integrat-
ing color, light, pattern, and finish in order to supplement function, flow, and
performance.
Don’t be confused. Interior design is not home staging, which was developed
years ago to help homeowners sell residential properties. Staging specialists
are trained to maximize the perception of space and light using principles that
appeal to a broader audience of potential buyers rather than family, friends,
and guests. Interior designers do all that plus include the elements of aesthetics,
temperature, sound, smell, balance, and harmony. All of these are value-added
elements that will help your property sell quickly and easily. They are certainly
worth your consideration as an investor and could very well be the difference
between selling a property and getting top dollar for a property.
Assembling Your Team
Although you may see putting together a team of professionals for your real es-
tate project as a costly and unnecessary expense, in reality it can be the smartest
investment you make beyond the investment in the property itself. Strongly
consider any or all of the following professionals to help you make the most of
your investment project. I am and have been very careful with my team selec-
tion. I started my business by aligning myself with a great architect and that re-
lationship has lasted for more than twenty years. I know that the way my team
collaborates is instrumental in the outcome of any project I undertake. Your
team should include an architect, interior designer, general contractor, land-
scape architect, engineers, and appropriate subcontractors. Your architect and
general contractor will usually recommend engineers and subcontractors with
whom they work, but it never hurts to have a few in your back pocket.
234 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
How to Select Your Team
1.Interview. Ask the tough design questions, but also try to get to know the
person to understand how he or she works.
2.Conversations with references. Ask about the outcome of the project, but
also listen for clues about work habits and service philosophy. Always ask
the question: “Would you hire this person again?”
3.Site visits to similar projects. Visit and view the end result to assess if the
final product lives up to the words.
4.Willingness. How willing is this person to work holistically to achieve a
common goal, that is, a profitable product that sells quickly and easily? If a
potential team member balks at the collaborative approach, it may be best to
move on.
Assemble your team right at the start because early involvement will benefit
both the process and the outcome. Delivering value is key, so the sooner the
team is assembled, the sooner everyone can begin contributing. The earlier in
the process those ideas surface, the more likely it will be that they can be
implemented.
Real Life Story: Having a Team
You Can Count On Really Counts
We have a wonderful client who has several homes. Some time ago, we were
awarded an elaborate remodel of their vacation home in Santa Fe. Because
we were based in Scottsdale, Arizona, we thought it might be more cost effective to
hire a local contractor to handle the details for phase one of the project. We learned
the value of a cohesive team the hard way.
Although we made several trips to check on the project and oversee the con-
struction, we hit a few roadblocks. The contractor had challenges he could not han-
dle with the team he had assembled, and communication was difficult from the
get-go. When we embarked upon phase two of the project, we decided to use our
Arizona-based team to handle the project. Instantly, our communication improved
and we were able to solve problems much more quickly than before. Moreover, be-
cause our tradespeople had worked together so often in the past, they were able to
effectively collaborate and avoid potential pitfalls even when they were on site with-
out us.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 235
Teams make great things happen. One day several years ago, Robert Kiyosaki
stopped by to visit me in my office. He wanted to discuss a new project he had
for me. My excited staff gathered around to hear all about it. Robert humbly
mentioned that while he was not a very knowledgeable man (highly debatable
by many), he did consider himself to be excellent at assembling a team of experts
in their respective fields. He considers that to be of utmost importance when
embarking on a project of any type. He has come to call that team his “trusted
advisors,” many of whom appear in this book.
Now let’s get to the people you’ll want on your team.
Team Member No. 1: The Architect
The right architect can be invaluable in providing not only a set of drawings for
construction but also insight into current trends in construction, engineering,
lighting, and environmentally friendly design. I don’t do anything today without
an eye toward green sustainable design. Depending on the size and scope of
your project, you can look to an architect to help guide the planning, design,
documentation, and construction administration of your project.
The architect on any project is usually considered the team leader. Not only
will he or she be able to provide a wealth of recommendations for other team
members, the architect will also be instrumental in keeping the project on track,
both from a budget standpoint as well as in terms of scheduling. Additionally,
because of the nature of their work, architects must be up to the minute on
current building codes and requirements. Building code violations can severely
impede the construction process by the assessment of fines and a significant
disruption in schedule. A good architect can also be an invaluable asset when
applying for building permits.
You’ll want to select an architect who will assume the role of team leader,
while allowing his or her team to flourish under his guidance. Again, collabora-
tion is the key here. While an architect is valuable for many parts of the project,
he or she must rely on team members for their respective talents. Of course,
basic chemistry is always a good barometer. Trust your intuition. Is this some-
one with whom I could trust with my project? Remember, the whole idea of as-
sembling a team is to allow you to achieve something you do not have the
experience or expertise to accomplish yourself.
When it comes to money, architectural fees vary with the project scope and
needs. Most architects will prefer to work on a fixed-fee basis with a defined
scope of work, or on an hourly basis with a “not to exceed” fee limit.
236 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Team Member No. 2: The Interior Designer
The right interior designer is the one who not only shares your vision but en-
hances it. He or she is the next necessary addition to your team. An interior de-
signer differs from an architect in many ways. While an architect is concerned
with the structure of your space, the interior designer helps you create spaces
that work and that flow in a logical and functional way.
Because an architect’s role encompasses several aspects of the design and
construction process, the interior designer can focus on realizing the overall vi-
sion of the project. Several years ago, I was hired to design a home on the coast
of Oregon for a longtime client. Luckily, I was brought on early in the project to
work with the client and the architect before they had completed the plans. We
traveled to Oregon, walked the site, and talked for hours about what the house
was to be. From those many discussions, we developed a set of rules for the
house. This would allow both the architect and me to adhere to those rules and
keep the design intent consistent. It becomes the designer’s job to ensure the
interior of the space will function as the team intends. Finishes, lighting, and
furniture are all integral parts of a successful project. The interior designer can
assist in any or all of these areas as well as in accessorizing and art placement.
The same rules for selecting an architect apply to selecting a designer. For-
tunately your architect can often recommend a designer or two from his own
team who would be ideal for your project. That’s how I began working with
Robert and Kim. Several years ago, they bought a very tired, but charming home
with the intent of lovingly restoring and adding on to it to make it their own.
They hired an architect who referred a general contractor. They also hired an
interior designer referred by a friend to complete their team. While Kim and
Robert are very easy to work with, the process did not go smoothly. A second
designer was hired with similar results. She simply did not share the vision the
team had. This is in no way a reflection on those designers or their capabilities.
It is simply a reinforcement of the importance of the team as a whole. Never-
theless, the contractor arranged a meeting between the team and me, and the
rest is history. The team certainly faced its challenges along the way, but we all
shared the same vision, had a common goal, and were determined to produce
the best project possible.
Team Member No. 3: The Landscape Architect
The landscape architect is in charge of site design, and this is the one person,
more than any other, who will set the property’s first impression. When you
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 237
think landscape architect, think curb appeal, and if you’ve bought or sold a
home, you know the importance of that. Look to a landscape architect for re-
gional neighborhood context design, site planning and furnishings, and high-
impact features with low maintenance. You want a design that enhances the
overall quality of the building or development and mixes well with the envi-
ronment. Here’s what I mean.
I recently completed a facelift for a twenty-year-old office building. The
owner wanted to sell and felt a fresh look to the building would speed up the
process. Without a huge budget, we knew we had to rely on color and landscape
to do the trick. We selected exterior paint colors to work with the existing nat-
ural stone and brought in a landscape architect to accentuate the building’s
best attributes. He suggested we clean up the entry by reducing the number of
overgrown plants, replacing them with smaller, easily maintained varieties. This
gave the building a cleaner aesthetic as well as an enticement to potential buyers
who were looking for less exterior maintenance. He also worked to accentuate
the main entries of the building, leading tenants and visitors to the entrances
with ease.
Team Member No. 4: The General Contractor
Very often, team members will recommend a general contractor with whom
they have successfully collaborated. If not, please refer to your local state agen-
cies to assist with the selection of a qualified contractor. When choosing a gen-
eral contractor, I look for a company or a person with whom I would enjoy
socializing. I know that sounds strange, but remember, this will be the team
member you will see most often. Of course, this person must meet all the other
criteria as well, but you really must have a good relationship with your con-
tractor. After all, he will be responsible for spending your money. Whenever
Robert and Kim embark on another project, we all look forward to the reunion
of our team, knowing the general contractor will ensure we get the project done
with minimal problems.
Many investors opt to handle the oversight of a project on their own. While
this can work well, it more often than not goes badly, particularly if the person
is inexperienced. My advice to clients is to always consider the scope and com-
plexity of the job before making that decision. Think about it. Do you have an-
other career that will keep you away from the jobsite? What is your time worth
compared to a contractor’s fee? Are you familiar with the local building codes,
construction methods, backup trades if necessary? Do you have strengths in
scheduling, budgeting, and managing people?
238 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
The value of an experienced contractor to manage the project and trades-
people is often a smart investment. On the other hand, if your remodel includes
little more than paint and carpet, you may be fine managing the project. A brief
consultation with an interior designer can help you select materials and provide
recommendations for appropriate trades. Bear in mind, however, sometimes
small projects lead to bigger ones. I’ve witnessed the discovery of problems
that are bigger than any owner can handle.
Eventually, the more you work with your team of experts, the more they will
become your trusted advisors, and you’ll consult them for projects big or small.
The more longevity you have with your team members and the more your rap-
port and working relationship with them grows, the better your outcomes will
be. I’ve found that projects become easier, move quicker, and deliver better re-
sults the longer I work with my team. Robert understands this, and that is one
of the benefits of this book. His trusted advisors—his team—can now be your
team through the pages of this book.
As a real estate investor, you will want to maximize your return. And just as
good property management plays a huge role in a property’s value, so does the
design of that property. But how do you know what design will bring in the
bucks and what will just be another expense that lowers your bottom line re-
turn? Here are the guidelines I use for different types of real estate endeavors.
Existing Home Strategies That Sell
The trend of purchasing an existing home, remodeling, and selling it has made
the need for staging unavoidable. Everyone wants to buy a home that looks like
a builder’s model. This concept was first developed by Barb Schwartz in 1972
and has grown over the years to become a widely used selling tool. It’s all about
merchandising the rooms to make them look like much more than just four
walls.
The goal of interior design for a residence is to personalize the space
according to the tastes and preferences of the homeowner. Staging is the
opposite. The professional stager’s job is to depersonalize the space and
allow potential buyers to imagine themselves living there.
As I mentioned before, professional staging is often confused with interior
design and actually, the two couldn’t be more different. Let’s talk about staging
for a moment because it is crucial to selling an existing home. When you decide
TIP
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 239
to sell, agree that you will live there in a much different way. In fact, you’ll want
to get packing early because all the personal effects in your home must go. Pre-
cious collections, photos, mementos, all the things that are “you” will say to
prospective buyers that this is your home, not theirs. So if you hire a stager or
do it yourself, get serious and get rid of the clutter. It’s all about vision.
As an interior designer of both residential and commercial spaces for more
than twenty years, the last thing I thought I needed when preparing to list my
home for sale was a stager. My realtor tactfully suggested that I meet with her
stager, “It can’t hurt,” she said. I grudgingly agreed. I will warn you, this is a
humbling experience. It’s unsettling to have someone tell you that your collec-
tion of exquisite Chinese foo dogs may be best placed in a box in the garage. My
advice is to listen and obey. I had spent seven years working to create a cozy
space out of a large, open tract house. She told me I had succeeded. That, how-
ever, is not what the typical homebuyer is looking for. Light, bright, and airy
still seems to be the best rule of thumb when preparing to sell a home. Also,
clean, uncluttered rooms provide the most appeal.
In tough real estate markets when nothing is selling, the staged house will
nine times out of ten be the one that sells first. So, as much as you won’t like
them, here are the five C’s of successful staging:
1. Clean. Everything should be immaculate. That means carpets, floors, walls,
counters, and bathrooms should look model-home perfect.
2. Clutter Free. Make counters, tables, and shelves ready for the buyer’s fa-
vorite things, not yours. Remove everything, and then some more.
3. Color. You may have loved it wild and crazy to match your purple sofa, but
buyers want to picture their own furniture and colors. Hot pink walls make
that difficult.
4. Creativity. Give buyers something to talk about and remember. They’ll be
looking at a lot of homes that eventually all blend together. Make yours un-
forgettable.
5. Compromise. Stagers will tell you to do it all, and you may find that you’ll
only go so far. No problem. Compromise and do those things that matter
most.
Did you know that most buyers make their buying decisions within the first
fifteen seconds of seeing a property? That’s a prevailing rule in real estate that
I believe to be absolutely true. What does that tell us? First impressions are
everything. It’s worth spending extra time and money on curb appeal or the
wow factor of the house.
240 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 241
Sell That House in Fifteen Seconds or Less
First impressions are everything and buying decisions are made in the first fifteen
seconds. Here are the top five areas to spruce up:
1. The front yard, including lawn, trees, walkway—clean, sweep, and plant flowers
with lots of color.
2. The front door and entryway—Give your door some color, or at least remove
the cobwebs, and then be sure the first few steps inside the home are memorable.
3. Exterior and interior paint—nothing freshens a home more than new paint.
4. Flooring, including carpets, tile, etc.—no stains, no worn carpet, no dirt
allowed.
5. Healthy green plants—emphasis on healthy, shiny plants without dead or dry
leaves, dust, messy pots or water stains. Placing plants and trees near windows
will blur the gap between inside and out, thus making the space feel larger and
more connected to nature.
Staging will make your property look so good that, if it is your own home,
you’ll wonder why you lived in it the way you did for all those years. I advise
everyone, particularly after my own experience, to hire a stager to help you weed
out the clutter. It takes brutal honesty, and stagers are known for it. Stagers will
rearrange furniture to maximize the appearance of space as well as downplay
less desirable features. If you want to take things to the next level—and in tight
markets you may have little choice—hire a professional stager and allow him or
her to use their existing inventory of accoutrements to enhance your home.
If you are selling a home that is unoccupied, don’t listen to people who say
an empty home sells better than one that is furnished. If that were true, no
builder would ever furnish a model home, and most all of them do. Stage the
home as best you can within your budget. If you can’t rent furniture from a
stager for the main rooms, set up small vignettes within the home. This can be
as simple as adding a few wall hangings, live plants, towels in the master bath,
and soft music. You’ll be surprised at the results.
The tangible aspects of a home are important, but there are intangibles as
well that you must consider. Have you ever walked into a space and immediately
felt uncomfortable, but had no idea why? That’s energy flow, and all spaces
have it. That discomfort usually comes from stale or bad energy in a space.
There are consultants who specialize in clearing spaces of this negative energy.
The ancient art of feng shui incorporates these principles and has done so for
more than three thousand years. Listed at the end of this chapter are Web sites
that will help you understand energy flow and how to improve it in your home.
Believe it or not, your own energy will either add to or detract from your
home. A positive attitude will create better energy in the space. Instead of wor-
rying about how long it will take you to sell the house, imagine how great those
precious foo dogs will look in your new home.
I know this all sounds like a lot of effort, but consider the statistics—having
homes properly staged significantly shortens the selling cycle as well as brings
a higher selling price.
There are lots of helpful resources to learn more about staging, such as home
stagingresource.com and stagedhomes.com. Perhaps the best book on staging
is by the creator of staging itself, Barb Schwarz. Her book, Home Staging: The
Winning Way to Sell Your House for More Money is the bible on the subject.
And she’s right about staging paying dividends. Homestaging.com. sites a recent
HomeGain Survey that shows home staging delivered as much as a 169 percent
return on investment. That’s a significant figure, making staging well worth the
time and effort.
Make Your Multifamily Housing
Project a Winner
Just as selling your own home is less about you and is all about the buyer, when
investing in multifamily housing, it’s all about the target resident. Ask yourself,
“Who is that person, and what will he or she want or expect from this prop-
erty?” Then, how can you take those expectations one step further to truly wow
them? Whether you developed the project from the ground up or are rehabili-
tating an existing property, spend your money on the things that will count in
the eyes of the target resident. Of course, you’ll want to contain your ambitions
242 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: It’s All About Experience
Recently my real estate agent, Joanne Callaway, related a staging success story to
me. She had been trying for months to sell a seemingly marketable home. The only
problem area was the dining room. It had one red wall to match the homeowners’
linens. I was surprised that this was the problem area as I often paint dining rooms
red. Nevertheless, Joanne called upon the services of her favorite stager who im-
mediately had the wall painted, changed the linens, added cushions to the dining
chairs, and the house sold in one week!
to a reasonable amount in proportion to the potential rent you can collect, but
you will need to focus on those things that will leave a lasting impression. If a
property isn’t special in some way, it will not be easy to rent. Ask yourself, “Why
would someone rent this property instead of the one down the street?” Consider
these factors when preparing a multifamily project:
1. Curb appeal. Clean up the trees, bushes, add a fresh coat of paint, dress up
the windows with awnings or shutters, repair steps and walkways, re-sod
the lawns, and plant flowers, lots of flowers.
2. Accessibility. Make sure you purchase properties with ample parking for
residents and guests. Inadequate parking is next to impossible to change.
The property should be ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) compliant,
or you may have to make it that way, which can be costly.
3. Location. This is real estate, after all, and location is everything.
4. Security and safety. Walls, security gates, security alarms, and security cam-
eras all add up to making residents feel safer, and can also justify higher
rents for very little up-front investment.
5. Durable finishes. If you are rehabbing the property, use the best finishes
you can afford and still maintain your profitability projections. Check your
competition in the area. If they have tile counters, you may need to have tile
counters.
6. Neutral finishes. This is so important in multifamily projects. Choose colors
that work for everyone, which usually means light, light, light.
7. Common area aesthetic. Is there a pool? Is there a clubhouse? Is there a
courtyard or garden? If so, it should look picturesque, clean, and be a true
amenity, not an eyesore. Make it a point of difference.
8. Views. People buy views, and views can be big wow factors. Even if your
project doesn’t look out to rocky mountain majesty, be sure it doesn’t look
out on the dumpster or an unkempt parking lot. If you are building, plan for
internal views to gardens or pool areas.
Showing a rental property is no different than showing a home. Here we go
again! Yes, you’ll want to furnish a model if you can. Rental spaces are usually
small and look even smaller without furniture. Once furniture is in place, how-
ever, spaces look bigger, and people can visualize living in them. They can see
that the space isn’t small after all. It is cozy, livable, and oftentimes just right.
Senior living properties are another type of multi-unit housing. As the baby
boomers age, the concept of the traditional nursing home is changing rapidly
and drastically. Independent living facilities are being built all over the country,
and there are new requirements for them, not all of which are coming from
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 243
government regulations. I’m talking about buyers’ requirements. This aging
population demands a much higher level of design than the generation preced-
ing it and they are willing to pay accordingly.
I am currently working with a developer on a number of senior living com-
munities. Think twenty-first century; they in no way resemble the nursing
homes of the past! These independent living communities are based on the de-
sire for an active lifestyle with minimal constraints from the residents’ pasts,
i.e., home maintenance, yards, housekeeping, etc. These communities focus on
the active lifestyles of this population with the utmost attention placed on com-
fort, autonomy, and quality of life. Obviously, we are working to respect and de-
liver on the changing needs of this population as it ages, but research has proven
that it can be done with good design and thoughtful planning. One project will
be set on the side of a mountain, and the hilly terrain obviously presents poten-
tial obstacles for an aging population. The architects and landscape architects
have worked on a site plan that will take advantage of the scenic views and the
wonderful climate by means of a series of covered breezeways and no stairs.
This is just one example of how we can maximize accessibility without calling
attention to potential limitations.
Commercial Spaces That Stand
the Test of Time
As you venture into the world of commercial real estate, many of the principles
we already talked about still apply. But first and foremost, you still need to take
the target tenant into account first and create a fantastic first impression. After
all, people want to be proud of where they work, and they want that space to be
functional and comfortable. That charge isn’t always easy because commercial
properties can often be quite large, quite complex, and rather impersonal. The
key is creating personal, more intimate spaces inside or outside a large building
to add that personal touch and provide respite from a busy day. It doesn’t take
much. A shady tree, a fountain, or a comfortable bench away from the hustle
and bustle can achieve this important goal. Alcoves within a lobby space with
nice art and comfortable furniture can work, too, while they welcome visitors
and provide a gathering place for tenants.
If your project is new construction, get an architect and an interior designer
on board right from the start. An architect’s primary role is creating the struc-
ture itself. An interior designer’s role is to design the interior spaces. Unless
244 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
* * * Free PDF Preview End * * *
Purchase Required To Gain Total Access
Visit www.propmgmtforms.com To Purchase Property Management Forms Package1
BASIC REAL ESTATE CONCEPTS
KEY TERMS
appurtenance
bill of sale
chattel
deed
hereditaments
highest and best use
immobility
improvements
indestructibility
land use controls
land
nonhomogeneity
personal property
personalty
real estate
real property
REALTOR®
realty
scarcity
situs
specific performance
tenements
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
At the conclusion of this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the characteristics of real estate, including classes of property, physical characteristics of
land, and economic characteristics of land.
2. Describe the concepts of land use and investment, including highest and best use, land use
controls, investment objectives, scope of the real estate business, and the real estate market.
IN THIS CHAPTER
This text is designed to help you master the fundamentals of real estate by introducing information
in a step-by-step format that requires no real estate background. This chapter provides an overview of
the entire real estate business. Each topic introduced in this chapter is discussed in more detail in the
following chapters.
You should use this chapter to become familiar with the format of the book, including objectives,
summary of important points, and questions. Each of these sections is designed to help you study the
CHAPTER
1
2 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
material efficiently to master this information. Finally, this text offers advice on
preparation for the North Carolina Real Estate Licensing Examination.
BASIC REAL ESTATE CONCEPTS
Real property has certain physical and economic characteristics that set it apart
from other marketable commodities. These characteristics are so interrelated that
they have a definite effect on one another and are sometimes difficult to separate
in a practical sense. This chapter discusses these characteristics and their effects
on real property value.
Basic Terminology and Definitions
Real estate, real property, realty, and land—These terms often are used inter-
changeably to describe the combination of land, improvements, and rights and
privileges. Title (ownership) is conveyed by deed.
Personal property, personalty, or chattel—Anything that is not considered to be
real property. Title is conveyed by bill of sale.
The first thing students will have to master in this course is the concept that
all property is either real or personal. The concept of real property is made up of
three components: land, improvements, and rights and privileges. (These compo-
nents are addressed in more detail in the forthcoming chapters, but the following
gives a brief introduction.)
Land—The surface of the earth with the boundaries extending downward to the
middle of the earth extended back upward to the highest heavens. Land consists
of three components: surface, subsurface, and airspace.
This concept shows us that much of what is considered “land” is, in fact, made
up of air. In common usage, the term “land” often is used in much the same way
as the terms real estate, real property, and realty.
Improvements—Anything used to better or “improve” the use of the land. These are
artificially attached items and are considered to be real property and not personal.
Appurtenance—Any right or privilege that is considered to run with the land.
Not all rights and privileges are considered to run with the land and may be
“personal” in nature. The concept of runs with the land is that the right or privi-
lege is an integral part of the property, much like structures or other improve-
ments, and are conveyed as a normal part of the deed transferring title to the real
property. For example, municipal water and sewer lines are an example of a right
or privilege the government has to place the pipes to provide utility service to the
property and likely others. When the title is conveyed to a subsequent owner, that
© OnCourse Learning.
3Basic Real Estate Concepts
right remains intact. The same would apply if a property owner has the right to
cross over adjoining property to access theirs. Most likely, this would be a perma-
nent right that would convey upon transfer.
Tenements—Ownership interest in anything immobile and is considered part of
the real property.
Hereditaments—Any rights capable of being inherited.
Economic Characteristics of Land
Scarcity
An important economic characteristic of real property (Figure 1.1) is its availabil-
ity or scarcity. Land is a commodity that has a fixed supply base. No additional
physical supply of land is being produced to keep pace with the ever-increasing
population. The problems created by an ever-increasing demand for the limited
supply of land, however, have been eased substantially by an increase in the eco-
nomic supply of land. This increase has come about as a result of the greater utili-
zation of the existing physical supply of land. Farmers are continuing to increase
the use of land in the agricultural area. Greater crop yields per acre are being
achieved as a result of scientific and technological advances. Today, the agricul-
tural industry is producing more cattle per acre and more bushels of crops per
acre than it did just a few years ago.
In urban areas, land is being utilized to a greater extent through high-
density development. Advances in science and technology result in the creation
of high-rise office buildings, apartment complexes, and multilevel shopping cent-
ers. Consequently, 1 acre of land serves many times the number of people who
could use the land in the absence of these improvements.
Modification by improvement is another factor that has increased the economic
supply of land. These modifications can include the construction of highways,
bridges, water reservoirs, purification plants, and public utilities. The improve-
ments and expansions of public air and land transportation systems also make
a significant contribution in this regard. These accomplishments in the fields of
1. Scarcity
2. Permanence of investment
3. Location
FIGURE 1.1 Economic characteristics of real property.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
© OnCourse Learning.
4 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
construction and transportation have converted land that had not been acces-
sible and useful in a practical sense into land that can now be used. A substantial
increase in the economic supply of land has resulted from these improvements to
the land (rather than improvements on the land).
Permanence of Investment
Because of the physical characteristics of immobility and indestructibility of
land, the investment of capital and labor to create improvements to the land and
improvements on the land is a long-term investment. It takes many years to recoup
the investment made to improve the value and quality of land. If a developer mis-
judges the demand for land-specific improvements or if economic conditions,
including real estate market conditions, change dramatically, the developer may
never recoup his full investment.
Location (Situs)
The location of land, or situs, is an extremely important economic (or more pre-
cisely, socioeconomic) characteristic of land, and it is the characteristic that has
the greatest effect on property value. The physical characteristic of immobility
dictates that the location of a parcel of land is permanent. Therefore, if the land
is located in an area where demand is high, the land will have a substantially
increasing value. Conversely, if the land is inaccessible from a practical stand-
point or is located in an area with little or no demand, its economic value will be
depressed.
Although the location of land cannot be changed, the value of the location
(and consequently, the value of the land) can be increased by improvements to
access and other modifications. Additionally, the value of the location can change
as the result of the changes in preferences of people. In the 1950s there was a
great flight from the urban centers to the suburbs. This resulted in property value
reductions in urban areas. This trend has moderated in recent years. People are
rediscovering the inner cities, rehabilitating older properties, and restoring lost
urban property values.
Physical Characteristics of Land
Immobility
An essential physical characteristic of land (Figure 1.2) is its immobility. That
land cannot be relocated from one place to another is an obvious feature of land as a
commodity and is the primary distinguishing feature between land and personal
property. The physical characteristic of immobility is the reason the economic
characteristic of location significantly affects land value, thus making the market
for land a strictly local market. This requires brokers and agents to have specific
© OnCourse Learning.
5Basic Real Estate Concepts
knowledge of their local real estate market to serve buyers and sellers in their
respective market areas.
Permanence (Indestructibility)
Another unique feature of land is its physical characteristic of indestructibility.
Land is a permanent commodity, and it cannot be destroyed. It may be altered sub-
stantially in its topography or other aspects of its appearance, but its geographic
coordinates remain. Land values can change positively or negatively as a result of
changing conditions in the surrounding area and are said to suffer from economic
obsolescence when such changes adversely affect the value of land. For example,
the construction of an interstate highway can radically affect land values. Do not
confuse economic obsolescence with physical depreciation, which is a loss in value
from deterioration of the improvements on the property itself (see Chapter 13).
The permanence or indestructibility of land makes it attractive as a long-term
investment, but an investor should be alert to changing conditions that can affect
the value of the investment.
Uniqueness (Nonhomogeneity)
An important feature of the land is that no two parcels are identical, in either a
physical or a legal sense. For example, two tracts of land are quite different from
two cars that come off an assembly line. Two cars may be nearly identical, and one
could be substituted for the other; this is clearly not the case with real estate. Even
two apparently identical adjoining parcels differ in aspects such as soil, drainage,
view, and vegetation, to name a few.
This uniqueness, or nonhomogeneity, of each parcel of land gives rise to the
concept of specific performance. If a seller contracts to sell her real property, the
law does not consider money a substitute for this duty. Thus, if a seller tried to
breach the contract and pay financial damages instead, the buyer could refuse to
accept the money and insist on taking title to the land as the only acceptable per-
formance of the contract. For example, one might sign a purchase agreement for
a home in a particular neighborhood because it was next to friends, family, or
schools. If the seller changed her mind and offered another, better home on the
other side of town, the buyer could hold the seller to specific performance of the
original contract for the unique advantages of that property.
1. Immobility
2. Permanence
3. Uniqueness
FIGURE 1.2 Physical characteristics of land.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
“Other textbook
resources list four
economic charac-
teristics of land:
scarcity, location,
improvements, and
permanence and three
physical character-
istics: immobility,
indestructibility, and
uniqueness.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
6 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
GENERAL CONCEPTS OF LAND USE AND INVESTMENT
The Highest and Best Use Concept
The concept of highest and best use is of extreme importance and considers all the
physical and economic factors affecting the land. The highest and best use of land
is that use that will provide the property owner the best possible return on an invest-
ment over a specified time period, resulting in the highest possible present value of
land. Present value is defined as the value at the time of the appraisal; therefore,
highest and best use can and does change with time. The use must be legal and
must comply with zoning ordinances, government regulations, legally enforce-
able private deed restrictions, and restrictive covenants. The highest and best use
of land is attained by the intelligent use of capital, labor, and other resources to
improve the land and its productivity.
The task of coordinating and combining capital, labor, and resources to create
an improvement is performed by an expert in real estate. The expert may be an
individual developer or may be a general partner in a limited partnership with
the other investors providing the capital as limited partners. The expert must
determine the use of the land that will provide the necessary income from the
land after labor and capital have been paid. For example, the expert will establish
the optimum size of a building to be constructed on a particular site. The space
should not be overimproved or underimproved. The building must not contain
more space than can be rented in the market, nor should it fail to provide the
space that the market demands. An overimprovement or an underimprovement
does not provide the optimum income to the land, and as a result, the land is not
put to its highest and best possible use.
A particular parcel of land has only one highest and best use at any particular
time. The loss of residual income to the land resulting from failure to employ the
land to its highest and best use causes the value of the property to diminish.
Public and Private Land Use Restrictions
Even though most land in the United States is privately owned, there is a vested
public interest in land because the type of property use affects surrounding prop-
erty owners and the general public. Because of this interest of the general public
and of other property owners, the use of land requires regulation for the benefit of
all. The need for land use controls has existed since the country’s founding. This is
especially true in areas of extremely dense population, where land uses radically
affect a great number of people.
Public land use controls exist in the form of city planning and zoning, state and
regional planning, building codes, suitability for occupancy requirements, and envi-
ronmental control laws. Additionally, there is substantial public control of land
use as a result of government ownership. Examples of government ownership
include public buildings, public parks, watersheds, streets, and highways.
© OnCourse Learning.
7General Concepts of Land Use and Investment
Regulation of land use in the private sector exists in the form of protective or
restrictive covenants established by developers, restrictions in individual deeds (pri-
vate deed restrictions) requiring the continuation of a specified land use or prohibit-
ing a specified land use, and use restrictions imposed on a lessee in a lease contract.
Real Estate Investment Objectives
Real estate investors come in many varieties, ranging from the individual who
buys one rundown property and fixes it up for resale or rental to the individuals
or corporations who buy large commercial complexes such as shopping centers
and factories.
The primary purpose of any investment is to produce income or profit, bal-
ancing the profit the investor desires against the risk he is willing to take. Real
estate offers the opportunity to make a profit in three ways: appreciation, positive
cash flow, and tax advantage.
Appreciation is the increase in market value during the time the investor holds
the property. If an investor buys a property for $100,000 and it increases 3% in
value annually, and he holds the property for 10 years, the property will have
appreciated to a value of $134,391.46.
A positive cash flow exists when the gross effective income produced by the
property exceeds the total of operating expenses. (See Chapter 13, “Real Property
Valuation,” for the discussion of gross effective income and expense.)
Tax advantages may result from appreciation or gains being taxed at a capital
gain rate lower than the investor’s marginal tax rate when the property is sold and
from deductions of property taxes, insurance, and other expenses during the time
the investor owns the property. Depreciation may provide an annual tax reduc-
tion, postponing the tax on the depreciated amount until the property is sold.
While appreciation, positive cash flow, and tax advantage are ways to make
money on real estate investments, leverage allows more money to be made on less
investment. For a simplified example, suppose an investor buys a $100,000 prop-
erty with an initial investment of $10,000 for down payment and closing costs.
The property appreciates $3,000 the first year, has a positive before-tax cash flow
of $50 a month, and produces a tax savings of $400 for the year. This $4,000 is
only 4% of $100,000, which is not a very good return on an investment. However,
it is 40% of $10,000, which is an excellent return on an investment.
Real estate, like any investment, has risks. The real estate’s market value can
decline, the property can deteriorate, or the area surrounding the property can
change, adversely affecting the property value. Rent or income may not meet
expectations. Plants or military installations nearby can close. An “oil glut” can
change to an “oil bust,” leaving an overabundance of office space, homes, and so
on. Environmental problems may adversely affect the property. If any of these
things occurs, the effect may be compounded by the real estate’s lack of liquidity.
The investor most likely cannot sell the property instantly for its full value.
© OnCourse Learning.
8 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
SCOPE OF THE REAL ESTATE BUSINESS
The real estate business is extensive in scope and is a complex industry. Usually,
when people think of the real estate business, they think only of residential bro-
kerage. This is just one of several specializations within the real estate business,
however. In fact, within the field of brokerage, there are several specializations,
including farm and land brokerage, residential property brokerage, and commercial
and investment property brokerage. In addition to brokerage, other specializations
in real estate include property management, appraising, financing, construction,
property development, real estate education, and government service.
Real estate transactions can be traced to early written records from biblical
times, but those transactions were between the seller and buyer directly, without
the participation of a real estate broker. The business of real estate brokerage is a
product of the twentieth century. In the early 1900s, states began enacting licens-
ing law legislation, and today all states in the nation require real estate brokers or
salespeople to be licensed. North Carolina adopted its Real Estate License Law
statute in 1957.
The establishment of the National Association of Real Estate Boards in
1908 was a major factor in the development of real estate brokerage. During the
1970s, the name of this trade group was changed to the National Association of
REALTORS® (NAR). The term REALTOR® is a registered trademark of NAR, and
it identifies licensees who are also members of the local, the state, and the national
association.
It is important to remember that all licensees are not REALTORS® and that
only the active members of these associations may use the term REALTOR® or
REALTOR ASSOCIATE®. One of the most important accomplishments of NAR
and its predecessor organization was the creation of a Code of Ethics in 1913.
This code has contributed significantly to the professional stature of real estate
brokerage. Strong parallels exist between licensing laws and this original Code
of Ethics.
Defining Broker and REALTOR®
The general public has a poor understanding of the distinction between a broker
and a REALTOR®.
The North Carolina Real Estate Commission issues real estate broker licenses
and regulates broker’s practices. The term REALTOR® designates a licensee (bro-
ker) who is also a member of the local association of REALTORS® at the city
or county level, a state association of REALTORS®, such as the North Carolina
Association of REALTORS® (NCAR), and NAR. The REALTOR® association is
in no way associated with or regulated by the Real Estate Commission, although
the two groups work together for the advancement of professionalism in the real
estate business.
© OnCourse Learning.
9Scope of the Real Estate Business
Not all licensees are REALTORS®. North Carolina has approximately 94,500
licensees, of whom only roughly about one-third are REALTORS®. In addition
to being answerable to the Real Estate Commission and to the civil and crimi-
nal courts for wrong-doing or failure of duty, the REALTOR® is also accountable
under the Code of Ethics to the local association of REALTORS®.
Other significant contributions of NAR include efforts that have resulted
in licensing laws being enacted in all states, legislative activity on the federal
level to prevent unnecessary and harmful legislation from diminishing rights
of private ownership in real property, and excellent programs of continu-
ing education for members and nonmembers through NAR and its affiliated
organizations.
Relocation is a growing part of the real estate business. A vast relocation
network exists. Many corporations offer transferring employees generous relo-
cation packages, including paying the closing costs for selling old homes and
purchasing new homes. Some corporations have in-house relocation depart-
ments to assist employees with every aspect of their move. Others contract with
third-party relocation companies to provide these services. Many corporations,
relocation companies, real estate brokerage firms, appraisers, attorneys, and
others who work with relocation belong to the Employees Relocation Coun-
cil, which provides networking, research, education, and so on, to its mem-
bers. In-depth coverage of relocation is beyond the scope of the text; however,
new agents are advised to become familiar with the wants, needs, and expecta-
tions of relocating individuals, families, and employers, as well as relocation
companies.
Real estate brokerage is the bringing together of buyers and sellers or land-
lords and tenants for the temporary or permanent transfer of an interest in real
property owned by others through purchase, sale, lease, or rental by a real estate
broker for compensation. In North Carolina, such brokerage activities require a
North Carolina broker’s license.
The fact that real estate represents a growing percentage of the wealth in the
United States illustrates the extremely broad scope and importance of the real
estate business. The complexity of this business requires that agents have con-
tinual interaction with people in a variety of other professions. Today’s real estate
practitioner needs a basic knowledge of the many functions performed by other
members of the real estate and allied professions.
Real estate professionals must work with mortgage bankers or brokers to
secure financing for their clients; appraisers to validate the value of the property;
home inspectors and wood-destroying insect inspectors to determine the condi-
tion of the property; developers and contractors when selling new construction;
attorneys, surveyors, and insurance agents when closing properties; and govern-
mental officials, such as tax assessors, environmental health specialists, and city
and county planners when necessary.
© OnCourse Learning.
10 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
Successful real estate practitioners are also counselors and educators who
must recognize the limits of their knowledge and guard against giving legal,
accounting, or tax advice.
The Real Estate Market
A free market is one in which the buyer and seller negotiate a purchase and sale
without undue pressure, urgency, or outside influence other than the principle of
supply and demand. Although government regulations may indirectly affect the
price of real estate or the costs of borrowing money to buy real estate, the govern-
ment does not set real estate prices. The principle of supply and demand deter-
mines real estate prices; thus, the real estate market is an excellent example of the
free market concept. Market value, which is discussed in Chapter 13, depends on
the free market concept.
Special Characteristics
The physical characteristics of land create special characteristics of the real estate
market that do not exist in other markets. As noted previously, the immobility of
real estate causes the market to be local in character, requiring local specialists
who are currently familiar with local market conditions, property values, and
availability. The nonhomogeneity, or uniqueness, of each parcel of real estate also
requires that the market be local. Each parcel of real estate is unique, primarily
because of its location.
The physical characteristic of immobility also results in a market that is slow
to react to changes in supply and demand. When supply substantially exceeds
demand, existing properties cannot be withdrawn from a local market area and
relocated to an area in which there is a higher demand. Conversely, when the
demand exceeds supply, new supplies of housing and business properties cannot
be constructed quickly. Therefore, after a recession, it takes many months for the
supply to equal or exceed demand in the real estate market.
Factors Affecting Supply and Demand
Several factors affect supply and demand in the real estate market, on both the
local and national levels. Examples of these factors include interest rates; avail-
ability of financing for purchase and construction; population migrations; varia-
tions in population trends and family formations; government regulations; local
and national economic conditions; and the availability and cost of building sites,
construction materials, and labor.
Historical Trends
Just as the economy as a whole is subject to peaks and valleys of activity that have
recurred over the years with fairly reasonable regularity, the real estate industry,
© OnCourse Learning.
11Scope of the Real Estate Business
as a part of this economy, is similarly subjected to recurring periods of recession
and prosperity.
The real estate industry is often the first industry to feel the adverse effects
of depressed conditions in the national and local economies. It may take the
real estate industry longer than the economy as a whole to climb out of a reces-
sion because of the inability of the real estate industry to react quickly to radical
changes in supply and demand. But that is not always the case. In recent times,
real estate has sometimes remained strong during a recession or led the recovery
from an economic downturn.
Another characteristic of the real estate cycle is that the real estate industry
usually attains a much higher level of activity in prosperous times than does the
economy in general.
The Real Estate Practitioner
North Carolina defines only one real estate license category, broker, since it
became an all-broker state on April 1, 2006, eliminating the “salesperson” license
category. All individuals or entities who want to engage in real estate broker-
age activities in North Carolina must first be licensed as brokers. Many current
brokers have received their licenses under previous criteria of either education
and experience (criterion one) and the passing of a state examination (criterion
two). Some have been licensed based on reciprocal licensing arrangements in
other states. Those who met the criteria for and were licensed as brokers before
April 1, 2006, can remain brokers with no provisional status attached to their
licenses. Those who were licensed as salespersons as of that date were licensed
automatically as brokers at that time, although with provisional status. All new
brokers licensed after April 1, 2006, were granted licenses on provisional sta-
tus. To remove provisional status, all provisional brokers must complete three
30-hour post-licensing courses and pass the course exams.
A broker without provisional status is able to practice independently. A broker
with attached provisional status is not. She must work under the supervision of a
broker who is a broker-in-charge (BIC) until she has completed all post-licensing
requirements to remove the provisional status and to practice independently. A
provisional broker cannot become a BIC. A BIC must have a minimum of two
years’ full-time real estate experience, which may be met as a broker regardless of
provisional status or lack thereof; however, provisional status must be removed
before becoming a BIC. Although the broker-in-charge is ultimately responsible
for all actions of the provisional brokers she supervises, the provisional broker
cannot escape responsibility for her duties and actions.
Relationships between brokers and clients/customers, as well as relation-
ships among brokers, are discussed extensively in Chapter 7. They are men-
tioned in this chapter only to clarify the terminology used in this text. The word
© OnCourse Learning.
12 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
broker or agent is used when the text is referring to a broker or a provisional
broker when differentiation between the two is not required. The terms broker
and provisional broker are used to differentiate the two categories of licensees,
when necessary.
The successful real estate practitioner is not engaged in applying techniques
of the “hard sell.” Rather, he is a counselor or an adviser working diligently to
solve the problems of buyers, sellers, and renters of real estate. Everyone who
contacts a real estate office has a problem. The problem involves real property—
the need to buy, sell, or lease. The real estate practitioner’s ability to solve these
problems for the benefit of others results in a successful career. Like any good
counselor, the real estate practitioner provides information to, but does not make
decisions for, the clients and customers. What information can and cannot be
provided depends on several factors, but especially on the law of agency, which is
discussed in Chapter 7.
A career in real estate can provide the practitioner with satisfaction from
serving the needs of people and with accompanying financial rewards. Success
in the real estate business is built on knowledge, service to others, and ethical
conduct in all dealings.
The real estate practitioner must be knowledgeable in a variety of other sub-
jects necessary to satisfactorily perform one’s obligations in real estate trans-
actions. These other subjects, which are discussed in depth in later chapters,
include property ownership and interests, transfer of title to real property, fun-
damentals of residential construction, valuation of real estate, land use controls,
fair housing laws, property management, insurance, and federal income tax
implications of real estate ownership and sale. The real estate practitioner also
must understand the meaning of the various real estate and legal terms used in
real estate transactions. Finally, the practitioner must have a basic understand-
ing of the various arithmetic problems that are common in the activities of real
estate brokerage.
Summary of Important Points
1. Real property includes the surface of the land, all improvements that are
attached to the property, everything beneath the surface, and the airspace
above the land.
2. Personal property (also called personalty or chattel) is the opposite of real
property—that is, everything that is not real property is considered per-
sonal property. Things that are readily movable—that is, not attached to the
land—are personal property.
3. Real property has the physical characteristics of immobility, permanence,
and uniqueness.
© OnCourse Learning.
13Summary of Important Points
4. Real property has unique economic characteristics based on its physical
location (situs).
5. The principle of highest and best use of land is an all-important concept in
land use. Failure to make the highest and best use of land results in a lower
value.
6. Controls of land use are necessary to protect the vested interests of the gen-
eral public as well as the interests of surrounding landowners. Land use
controls can be private, such as private deed restrictions and restrictive cov-
enants, or public, such as zoning ordinances.
7. The real estate business involves many specialties besides residential bro-
kerage and requires knowledge of many fields, including finance, housing
codes, government regulations, contract law, and appraisal.
8. A real estate market is local and is an example of the free market concept
wherein buyers and sellers have adequate time and information to reach
a purchase and sale agreement without undue pressure, and with factual
knowledge of all important aspects of the transaction. The physical and eco-
nomic characteristics of land create a market that is local and slow to react
to fluctuations in supply and demand.
9. The effects of depressed economic conditions are sometimes felt by the real
estate industry before other segments of the economy. Traditionally, the real
estate industry has been slower to pull out of depressed economic periods,
but typically it reaches higher peaks of activity and prosperity during pros-
perous times than many other segments of the economy. In recent times,
however, the real estate market has remained strong during a recession and
sometimes has led the recovery from an economic downturn.
10. The real estate agent acts as an advisor or problem solver for the benefit of
one’s clients and customers. Because the purchase of a home involves the
seller’s most important financial asset and creates long-term financial obli-
gations for the buyer, the agent must be thoroughly knowledgeable, compe-
tent, and responsible.
11. Real estate investment offers the opportunity to earn profits through
appreciation of the property value, tax advantages, and positive cash flow.
Leverage allows an investor to earn a greater return on a smaller initial
investment. Some of the risks involved in real estate investments are market
value declines, property deterioration, and adverse changes in the surround-
ing area.
© OnCourse Learning.
14 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
Review Questions
Answers to the review questions are in the Answer Key at the back of the book.
1. All of the following are separable ownerships
in land EXCEPT:
A. surface of the land.
B. area below the surface.
C. nonhomogeneity.
D. air rights.
2. The characteristic of land that causes the real
estate market to be essentially a local market
is the physical characteristic of:
A. indestructibility.
B. immobility.
C. availability.
D. natural features.
3. The nonhomogeneity of land:
A. is the basis for the legal remedy of specific
performance.
B. results from the uniqueness of every par-
cel of real estate.
C. is a physical characteristic of land.
D. all of the above.
4. An increase in the economic supply of land
has resulted from:
A. increased utilization of the physical supply
of land.
B. modification by improvements to the land.
C. high-density development.
D. all of the above.
5. The quality of the location of land and,
consequently, the value of the land can be
changed by:
A. the principle of nonhomogeneity.
B. relocation of the land.
C. changes in the national scope of the real
estate business.
D. improvements to the land that result in
accessibility not previously available.
6. The employment of the concept of highest
and best use:
A. includes consideration of the physical and
economic factors affecting land use.
B. results in the greatest present value of the
land.
C. must be a use feasible in the near future.
D. all of the above.
7. An example of public land use controls is:
A. restrictive covenants.
B. zoning laws.
C. deed restrictions.
D. protective covenants.
8. Real estate investment offers the opportunity
to produce a profit in the following ways
EXCEPT:
A. appreciation.
B. positive cash flow.
C. specific performance.
D. tax advantages.
9. The real estate market may be described in all
the following ways EXCEPT:
A. a free market.
B. a local market.
C. a movable market.
D. a market that is slow to react to changes in
supply and demand.
10. The function of a real estate agent in dealings
with buyers and sellers in the real estate
market may best be described as which of the
following?
A. financier
B. counselor or advisor
C. contractor
D. salesperson
© OnCourse Learning.
15Review Questions
11. The real estate agent must have specialized
knowledge of a variety of subjects that
include all of the following EXCEPT:
A. financing.
B. contracts.
C. legal advice.
D. valuation of property.
12. Economic characteristics of real property
include which of the following?
A. location
B. immobility
C. indestructibility
D. nonhomogeneity
13. Which of the following has the greatest effect
on real property value?
A. tax rates
B. location
C. availability
D. indestructibility
14. Which of the following is an example of the
private control of land use?
A. zoning
B. restrictive covenants
C. building codes
D. environmental controls
15. The term REALTOR® designates:
A. any real estate licensee.
B. a real estate licensee who is a member of
the national, state, and local association of
REALTORS®.
C. only licensees who hold broker’s licenses.
D. all of the above.
16. Physical characteristics of land include all of
the following EXCEPT:
A. location.
B. nonhomogeneity.
C. permanence.
D. immobility.
17. The National Association of REALTORS® is:
A. a government organization.
B. a trade group.
C. an organization for buyers and sellers of
commercial real estate.
D. all of the above.
18. Factors affecting supply and demand in real
estate include all of these items EXCEPT:
A. government regulations.
B. interest rates.
C. local economic conditions.
D. real estate investment trusts.
19. Scarcity and location are examples of:
A. physical characteristics of the land.
B. highest and best use.
C. permanence of investment.
D. economic characteristics of the land.
20. All of the following are public land use
restrictions EXCEPT:
A. building codes.
B. protective covenants.
C. zoning.
D. regional planning.
© OnCourse Learning.
KEY TERMS
air rights
alienation
appurtenance
appurtenant easement
bundle of rights
condemnation
condominium
cooperative
co-ownership
curtesy
declaration of restrictions
defeasible fee
dower
easement
easement in gross
emblements
eminent domain
encroachment
encumbrance
estate
estovers
fee simple absolute
fixture
foreshore
freehold estate
fruits of industry (fructus
industriales)
fruits of the soil
(fructus naturales)
hereditament
intestate succession
joint tenancy
judgment lien
land
lateral support
leasehold estates
levy
lien
life estate
life tenant
lis pendens
littoral rights
marital life estates
mineral lease
nonfreehold estate
North Carolina Condominium
Act
partition
party wall
prescription
profit or profit à prendre
pur autre vie
remainderman
reversionary interest
riparian rights
severalty
subjacent support
survivorship
tenancy by the entirety
tenancy in common
tenements
time sharing
townhouse
Uniform Commercial
Code (UCC)
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP
AND INTERESTS2
CHAPTER
16
© OnCourse Learning.
17The Concept of Property
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
At the conclusion of this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Define and give examples of real property and personal property.
2. Define and give examples of fixtures, as well as describe tests for determining whether an item
is a fixture.
3. Define and list the freehold estates.
4. Define severalty and concurrent property ownership, including condominiums, townhouses,
cooperatives, planned unit developments (PUDs), and time-share property.
5. List and define types of lien.
6. List and define types of easement.
7. Define encroachments and appurtenances such as water, air, and subsurface rights.
8. Describe real property taxation and special assessment systems in North Carolina.
IN THIS CHAPTER
This chapter begins the discussion of the various forms of real property ownership. Real
estate is defined by (and is subject to) a complex and unique body of laws. Although
you will be exploring a variety of legal terms, you should not give legal advice. Pro-
viding legal advice or opinions is defined as the practice of law, which only attorneys
are authorized to do. It is, however, the duty of real estate agents to recognize basic
concepts of law as they affect clients and customers and to see that they are properly
informed of their rights and obligations through appropriate legal counsel.
THE CONCEPT OF PROPERTY
Property is an individual’s, a group’s, or an entity’s ownership rights, interest, and
legal relationship to something, tangible or intangible, to the exclusion of other
individuals, groups, and entities. Property, therefore, may be considered a legally
created and protected bundle of rights, which an individual, a group, or an entity
has in a tangible item or an intangible concept. A bundle of rights includes the
right to possession of the property; the right of quiet enjoyment of the property; the
right to exclude others; the right to dispose of the property by gift, by sale, or by
will; and the right to control the use of the property and profits within the limits of
the law. The components of the bundle can belong to one owner or can be sepa-
rated with rights or groups of rights belonging to different owners. Examples of
separate ownership of various rights in the bundle abound. For example, Hertz,
a corporate entity, owns cars (tangible property) but rents the right to use those
cars (intangible property) to individuals; an owner of an office building leases
office space (right to possess and use) to a corporation; and a landowner sells the
mineral rights to his property while retaining all other rights. Note that owner-
ship and lease rights may coexist within the same property at the same time.
“When you purchase
a property, you get a
bundle of rights. The
items in the bundle
can be remembered by
the acronym DEEPC:
Disposition, Enjoy-
ment, Exclusivity, Pos-
session, and Control.”
—Terry Wilson, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
18 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Property is divided into real property and personal property. Real estate practi-
tioners must have a thorough understanding of the differences between real and
personal property. Different laws apply to each type of property. Most items of
personal property do not require written documentation of transfer of owner-
ship, but all transfers of ownership of an interest in real property must be in writ-
ing. Personal and real property are taxed differently. Owners’ and creditors’ rights
differ depending on whether the property is real or personal.
Real Property
In Chapter 1, real property, also called real estate and realty, was defined as land
and everything permanently attached to the land. A concept of the law of real
property is that real property consists of lands, tenements, and hereditaments;
therefore, everything included in the following definitions of these terms is a
component of the property owner’s bundle of rights.
Land is the surface of the earth; the area below the surface to the center of the
earth; and the area above the surface, theoretically, to the highest heavens.
Plants are either annuals or perennials. Annuals must be planted each
year and are considered personal property. Annuals are also called fructus
industriales.
Perennials do not require annual cultivation and are considered real
property unless planted in a moveable container. Perennials are also called
fructus naturales.
Land includes structures and other improvements (such as fences, swimming
pools, flagpoles, and retaining walls) that have been placed there with the inten-
tion that they be a permanent part of the land.
Tenements and Hereditaments
Tenements include all those things that are included in the definition of land and
include both corporeal and incorporeal rights in land. Corporeal rights are tangible
things—things that can be touched and seen. Incorporeal rights are things that
are intangible. Tenements include buildings (corporeal). Tenements also include
rights in the property of another, such as an easement (incorporeal). In addition,
tenements include intangible rights in the land of another, such as the right to take
minerals, soils, timber, fish, or game from that land. This right is called profit à
prendre, or simply profit.
Hereditament is a term that includes everything in the term land and everything in
the term tenements that is capable of being inherited. The land and buildings are
© OnCourse Learning.
19The Concept of Property
capable of being inherited and are therefore hereditaments. Some personal rights
in land, such as the right to fish and some easements, may not be inheritable. If
these rights are not inheritable, they are not hereditaments.
Things that grow in the soil may be included in the definition of real prop-
erty. Growing things that do not require planting or cultivation but that grow
naturally and are perennial are fruits of the soil (fructus naturales) and are desig-
nated in law as real property. Examples include forest trees, native shrubs, and
wild berries. Growing things that require planting and cultivation are fruits of
industry (fructus industriales) or emblements and are defined as personal prop-
erty. These are usually annual crops, and examples include corn, wheat, melons,
and soybeans. The term emblements also is used to denote the right of a tenant
to reenter the property and harvest the emblements after the termination of
the tenancy.
Appurtenances
An appurtenance is any right or privilege that is said to “run with the land.”
Therefore, it transfers with title to the land. Several of the items discussed next
are examples of common appurtenances, such as subsurface, air, and riparian
(water) rights. These three examples illustrate that an appurtenance cannot exist
by itself; that is, the easement must attach to the primary item, the land that it
affects. Other examples of appurtenances include appurtenant easements and the
benefits of restrictive (protective) covenants (discussed later in this chapter).
Subsurface Rights
A subsurface right, or mineral right, is an interest in real property that allows the
owner to take minerals from the earth. The owner may conduct mining opera-
tions or drilling operations personally or may sell or lease these rights to others
on a royalty basis. A mineral lease permits the use of land for mineral exploration
and mining operations. (The Statute of Frauds, discussed in Chapter 4, requires
that such a lease be in writing to be enforceable.) The lease may be for a definite
term or for a period as long as the land is productive. A mineral royalty is income
received from leases of mineral land.
Air Rights
Ownership of land includes ownership of and the rights to the area above the sur-
face of the earth (air rights). The right of ownership of the airspace enables the
landowner to use that space to construct improvements, to lease, or to sell to
others.
The right of ownership and control of the airspace is limited, however, by zon-
ing ordinances and federal laws. Zoning ordinances often restrict the height of
improvements constructed on the land, and federal laws permit the use of the
“Mineral, oil, gas and
subsurface leases must
be in writing in North
Carolina.”
—Melea Lemon, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
20 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
airspace by air traffic flying at an altitude specified by the government. As a prac-
tical matter, a property owner is entitled to claim only the area above his land that
he might reasonably be expected to use.
Water Rights
The appurtenant rights of an owner of property bordering a flowing body of water
are riparian rights. Riparian rights attach to the land but cannot exist by
themselves. Generally, property adjacent to a river or watercourse affords the
landowner the right to access and use the water for purposes such as drawing
water for personal use and entering the water via a boat pier. Actual owner-
ship of the water depends on a number of factors. North Carolina recognizes
the distinction between a navigable and a nonnavigable watercourse. In the
former, adjacent owners are limited to the banks of the watercourse, whereas
the state owns the body of water and the right to use it. If one owner owns all
of the land surrounding a nonnavigable body of water, that owner owns all of
the land under the water. If more than one owner owns property surrounding
a nonnavigable body of water, ownership extends to the center of the water,
unless the deed states otherwise.
Littoral rights are the rights of landowners whose property borders an ocean or a
lake. If the water levels fluctuate, as with ocean tides, the landowner owns to the
mean high watermark. The state owns the foreshore, which is the land between the
mean high watermark and low watermark.
An owner’s riparian property and property rights can be affected by changes in
boundaries caused by the natural forces interacting with land and water. Although
the geographic coordinates of land do not change, the part of the surface covered
by the land and water can and do change over time.
The real estate practitioner should understand the following four natural pro-
cesses that affect riparian boundaries.
1. Accretion is a gradual process in which the boundary of riparian land is
extended by natural forces, usually water from a river, a lake, or an ocean
depositing soil, sand, or rock onto areas previously covered by water. This
acquired land becomes the property of the riparian property owner.
2. Reliction is also a gradual process and results from the permanent receding
of the water that leaves the ground under it dry and exposed. This acquired
land becomes the property of the riparian property owner.
3. Erosion, the reverse of accretion, is a natural process in which the flow or
movement of water gradually produces a loss of riparian land—for example,
beach erosion. The riparian property owner loses title to the land.
4. Avulsion, unlike accretion, reliction, and erosion, is not a gradual process.
It is a rapid or sudden change in riparian land, either loss or gain, result-
ing from violent natural forces. There is no legal boundary change for land
“When the river or
stream is navigable,
you own to the water’s
edge. When it is non-
navigable, you own to
the center of the river
or stream.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
21The Concept of Property
affected by avulsion. The owner can reclaim the lost land. Theoretically, an
owner retains title to and can reclaim land lost through avulsion; however,
environmental laws may limit or void his right to do so.
5. Doctrine of prior appropriation is based on the theory that the first person
to use the water has a continued right to do so and the later owners can make
reasonable use of what is left.
Lateral and Subjacent Support
Land previously was defined as the surface of the earth; the area below the sur-
face to the center of the earth; the air above the earth, theoretically, to the high-
est heavens; and everything permanently attached to the earth. For purposes of
understanding lateral and subjacent support, consider only the solid surface of
the earth. The ground is surrounded by more ground or by water. Riparian rights,
the rights of landowners whose property borders water, are well defined in law.
The solid surface of land can be gained or lost by forces of nature or by man’s
activity. What would happen if your neighbor decided to excavate the dirt from
her land bordering your property for a project elsewhere? Unless your land is
solid rock, the solid surface could shift, perhaps destroying or undermining the
support of improvements on your land. Your neighbor cannot remove the dirt
because you have a right of lateral support, which means the right of land to be
supported in its natural state by adjacent land.
Now consider the part of the land that is below the surface of the earth. Sup-
pose you sell the mineral rights. The owner of those subsurface rights can mine
beneath your surface, but she must support your surface rights from below. She
cannot cause the surface of your land to collapse. Subjacent support is the right to
have one’s land supported from below.
Personal Property
Personal property (also referred to as chattel or personalty) is anything that is
not real property; therefore, it is not land or anything permanently attached to
land. Unlike real property, it is readily, although not necessarily easily, movable.
Some personal property can be severed, or removed, from the property (such
as crops) and other property becomes a part of the real property by attaching
or annexation (such as planting trees obtained from a nursery). Once attached,
it becomes part of the real property unless excluded. Factory-built homes are
another example of personal property unless steps have been taken to perma-
nently affix it to the land including the requisite paperwork needed to convert it
to being considered real property. Its “bundle of rights” is not identical to that
of real property. Some property can be classified as real or personal property,
depending on circumstances. Ownership of personal property is conveyed by a
bill of sale.
© OnCourse Learning.
22 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Fixtures
Intent is the major determinant in deciding if an item is a fixture.
A fixture is an item of personal property that is attached to the land or a perma-
nent improvement on the land in such a manner that the law deems it to be part
of the real property to which it is attached. Fixtures cause many problems because
of misunderstandings by the parties involved. Real estate practitioners can avoid
problems by thoroughly understanding the criteria for a fixture and paying care-
ful attention to detail when listing and selling property.
Total circumstance test. This test, composed of four criteria or factors, may be
used to determine an item’s identification as a fixture in the absence of a contrac-
tual agreement by the parties.
1. Intention: Did the person making the attachment intend to make a perma-
nent improvement? Would it be evident to a reasonable, rational person that
the annexor’s intention was that the improvement be permanent? For exam-
ple, the owner of a property installs a ceiling fan in the family room. This
criterion should be used in conjunction with the other criteria. If the owner
expressly states her intention that the attachment is permanent, such as the
sales contract stating the item is considered a fixture, and all parties involved
are aware of the express intention, the express intention will rule without
regard to the other three criteria.
2. Relation of the attacher: An owner is presumed to make a permanent improve-
ment, whereas a renter may be presumed to make a temporary attachment.
However, the real estate agent should not presume anything about the
annexor’s ownership but should ask questions if a tenant is involved. If the
real property owner has permanently attached personal property to his real
property during his ownership, the attached property is usually considered
real property. (See the paragraph “Effect of the Uniform Commercial Code”
for an exception.) Once the item becomes real property, its ownership passes
to the new owner when the present owner sells or otherwise disposes of the
property, absent a contract or an agreement to the contrary. Take the exam-
ple regarding the ceiling fan. If a tenant instead of the owner of the property
were to install the fan, would his intention be that the ceiling fan remain
with the property or would he plan to take down the ceiling fan he had pur-
chased and replace it with the original fixture?
3. Method: Does the method of attachment mean that removal of the item will
damage the property? Answering this question is a bit tricky. What consti-
tutes damage? Is a small nail or screw hole damage? What is “permanently
attached”? It may not actually need to be attached. This criterion absolutely
© OnCourse Learning.
23The Concept of Property
must be used in conjunction with the other circumstances. A small picture
hanger on a wall likely does not constitute substantial or permanent attach-
ment, but a pair of thousand-pound statues sitting on custom-made concrete
pillars may.
4. Adaptation: How is the item being used? Is the item adapted to the real prop-
erty to which it is attached? An example would be blinds custom made to fit
nonstandard windows. The more “site specific” an item is the less obviously
attached it needs to be in order to be considered an attachment.
Courts have not been consistent in their application of the total circumstance
test. If the courts cannot agree, buyers, sellers, and real estate agents are unlikely
to always agree. Although real estate agents must understand these criteria, they
should not give legal advice as to what is or is not a fixture in a given circum-
stance. That would be practicing law without a license. They can avoid, how-
ever, most problems in this area by using and understanding the North Carolina
Bar Association/North Carolina Association of REALTORS® (NCBA/NCAR)
Standard Form No. 2-T, Offer to Purchase and Contract, found in Chapter 10,
page 276. Familiarizing the seller with this form at the time of listing and the
buyer at the initial buyer interview, or at least by the time of the offer, is an excel-
lent way to prevent misunderstandings.
Test Tip!
For an excellent list of fixtures that are important for testing purposes,
refer to paragraph 2 of the Offer to Purchase and Contract (Chapter 10,
Figure 10.2).
The practitioner must ensure that all parties understand all contracts. This can be
accomplished by clearly identifying fixtures and personal property in both the list-
ing and the sales contracts. Real property can become personal property by contract.
For example, a chandelier is personal property until it is installed in the house and
then becomes a fixture upon installation. If the contract provides for the chandelier
to be replaced with a less expensive one, the original chandelier again becomes per-
sonal property upon removal according to the contract, and the new, less expensive
chandelier, which is personal property when it is purchased, becomes real property
when it is installed according to the contract. If the contract were silent about the
chandelier, the buyers could reasonably expect the chandelier to be a fixture and to
convey as real property. In some instances, something is considered a fixture simply
because the contract states that it is a fixture even though the item does not appear
to meet the standards for a fixture listed previously, such as a stove. Simply stated, if
the contract says that an item is a fixture, then it is a fixture.
© OnCourse Learning.
24 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Trade fixtures. A special category of fixtures is recognized for the items of per-
sonal property that are used in the course of a business operating in a leased
property. For example, a merchant may rent a store and install shelves to display
merchandise. These shelves are a temporary attachment necessary for the opera-
tion of the business. A more complex situation would arise in the operation of
a restaurant in a rented space. Consider all the items required in this operation,
including stoves, ovens, grills, chairs, tables, and so on. Such attachments are rec-
ognized as trade fixtures, and they retain their personal property classification
such that the restaurant tenant can remove them at the termination of the lease.
The tenant remains liable for any damages caused by the removal of the trade
fixture at the expiration of the lease.
Again, the agent must ensure that all understandings of the parties are sup-
ported by terms of a rental contract. Recall, however, that only attorneys can draft
contracts. Real estate practitioners would exceed their authority and be entering
the prohibited practice of law if they attempted to write legal clauses in a contract.
Agricultural fixtures. Agricultural fixtures are those fixtures installed by a prop-
erty owner for the purposes of agricultural use. Although historically treated dif-
ferently, they are now treated the same as trade fixtures.
Effect of the Uniform Commercial Code. A special situation occurs when an
owner has financed the purchase of an item installed in her property. The Uni-
form Commercial Code provides for the lender to retain a security interest in a
chattel (personal property) until the lender is paid in full. An instrument called
a security agreement, which is put on the public record by the filing of a notice
called a financing statement, creates the security interest. This notice is filed in the
office of the Register of Deeds. The filing of the financing statement provides con-
structive notice to the world that a security interest exists in the item. As a result,
the attached item is not legally classified as a fixture, or a part of the real property,
until the security agreement has been satisfied by full payment. It is treated as
personal property of the homeowner until such time as it has been paid for in
full. Before that time it can be repossessed by the creditor to satisfy repayment.
Consequently, the lender can remove the item in the event the buyer/borrower
defaults in payment, even though the item has been attached to real property.
Subsequent purchasers, as well as a subsequent lender, are bound by the filing of
the financing statement. Therefore, a purchaser of the home or a lender accept-
ing the property as security for a mortgage must complete the payments or per-
mit the removal of the item by the lender in the event the property owner does
not satisfy the debt.
Improvements
Numerous improvements must be made to and on raw land to make it accessible
and suitable for the various uses people have for it. An improvement is anything
of value that is added to real property or anything that alters real property in
“At the end of a lease,
trade fixtures remaining
after the lease term
are considered aban-
doned by the tenant
and become the
real property of the
landlord through the
process of ‘accession.’”
—Tim Terry, DREI
“The application of
the UCC to fixtures
keeps these items as
personal property or
personalty until the
debt has been repaid.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
25The Concept of Property
such a way as to increase its utility or value; however, these improvements do
not include repairs and replacements. The definition has two parts: (1) private
improvements, usually done on the land by the property owner; and (2) public
improvements such as streets, sewers, water, and sidewalks done to the land by
government or quasi-government organizations. From a practical point of view,
the agent should make certain that all parties understand the meaning each party
intends to convey when using the terms improvements, improvements to the land,
improvements on the land, improved land, or improved lot.
Improvements on the land done by property owners include structures such as
buildings, paved driveways and walkways, tennis courts, fences, walls, and swim-
ming pools. They do not include routine maintenance, repairs, or replacements.
Improvements to the land done by government or quasi-government entities
may include the following:
1. Roads, highways, and bridges built to make the land accessible.
2. Utilities such as electric power, water, sewer, gas lines, and phone lines
brought to the site.
3. Modifications or improvements such as clearing, grading, and draining to
make it suitable for its intended use.
“Improved land” or “improved lot” could mean the land or lot has had improve-
ments to it to prepare it for a building, or it could mean that improvements such
as buildings have already been constructed on it. The important thing is for the
agent to make certain that the meaning is clear when listing, advertising, and
negotiating offers to purchase and in all other aspects of the transaction.
Test Tip!
For the National Exam section, the student should treat an improvement as
an appurtance.
Factory-Built (Manufactured) Housing
Just like many components of a house today that are manufactured in a factory
so is the case for entire homes. Although historically these type homes have been
viewed as “less desirable” than a stick-built home, the reality is that manufactur-
ing tolerances and conditions are superior to that of many site-built structures.
The absence of weather-related delays, reduced theft, and the ability to literally
work around the clock make this type of construction attractive in many ways.
The reference to a “manufactured” home is a modern term for what many peo-
ple traditionally have called a mobile home or house trailer. Today’s manufactured
home is built according to rigid U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop-
ment (HUD) standards and will have a HUD certification label affixed to the exte-
rior of the structure. This type of housing can be considered either personal or real
property depending on the steps taken by the owner. Initially the manufactured
© OnCourse Learning.
26 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
home is considered personal property and will be titled with the North
Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) much the same as an automobile
is registered. One of the characteristics of the manufactured home is that it will be
constructed on a permanent nonremovable steel chassis, although brokers need
to be aware that some modular homes may utilize a steel chassis as well.
The owner can convert a manufactured home to real property status by remov-
ing the wheels, axle, and moving hitch and affixing the structure to a permanent
foundation owned by the homeowner. Once this work has been completed, the
owner can file an affidavit of conversion that cancels the title with the DMV, which
will finalize the conversion from personal to real property. Once this is done, the
owner will need to change the tax listing to show the unit is now real property
and the bill of sale and lien will need to be changed to a deed and deed of trust as
applicable. Unlike many other situations involving attaching personal property so
that it may be considered real property, the manufactured home does not auto-
matically convey to real property merely upon attachment. Until the appropriate
paperwork has been completed and filed, the unit will remain personal property.
Many people confuse modular housing as merely a type of manufactured hous-
ing. Although both examples are clearly built in a factory, the modular home is
built in accordance with state building codes and once constructed on the per-
manent foundation will be considered real property. These type of units also will
have an identifying label, including a serial number, that typically is affixed next
to the electrical panel, under the sink area, or on the back of the unit.
Most subdivision protective covenants that prohibit the construction of a man-
ufactured home will not affect the ability of the property owner to construct a
modular home on the lot.
ESTATES IN REAL PROPERTY
Definition of Estate
An estate in real property is an interest in the property sufficient to give the owner
of the estate the right to possession of the property. It is essential to understand
the difference between the right of possession and the right of use. The owner of
an estate in land has the right of possession of the land in addition to the right to
use it. An easement owner, in contrast, has the use of the land but not the right to
possess it; therefore, the easement is a nonpossessory interest in land. The Latin
translation for the word estate is “status.” This indicates the relationship in which
the estate owner stands with reference to rights in the property, and it establishes
the degree, quantity, nature, and extent of interest a person has in real property.
Types of Estate in Land
Estates in land are divided into two groups: estates of freehold and estates of less
than freehold (also called leasehold estates and nonfreehold estates). Two estates
© OnCourse Learning.
27Estates in Real Property
can exist simultaneously in land. The owner (lessor) of a property has a freehold
estate. If she leases the property, the tenant (lessee) has a leasehold estate. Each of
these two major divisions contains various groupings or subheadings.
Freehold Estates
Freehold is defined as an interest in land of at least a lifetime and therefore gener-
ally is identified with the concept of title or ownership. Freehold estates may be fee
simple estates or life estates (see Figure 2.1). Fee simple estates are inheritable;
most life estates are not.
Freehold estates are divided into two categories: estates of inheritance and
estates not of inheritance.
I. ESTATES OF INHERITANCE
Estates of inheritance last a lifetime and continue after the death of the title-
holder as they are passed on to one’s heirs.
A. Fee simple estates
1. Fee simple absolute. The estate of fee simple absolute provides the great-
est form of ownership available in real property.
This estate may be described as fee simple absolute, fee simple, or owner-
ship in fee. Ownership in fee simple absolute provides certain legal rights
usually described as a bundle of rights. The owner in fee simple absolute
may convey a life estate to another, may pledge the property as security
for a mortgage debt, may convey a leasehold estate to another, may grant
FREEHOLD ESTATES
I. Inheritable
A. Fee simple estates
1. Absolute
2. Determinable
3. Conditional
B. Life estate pur autre
vie (inheritable during
measuring lifetime)
II. Not inheritable
A. Conventional life estate
B. Marital life estate
Note: Freehold estates
provide title.
NONFREEHOLD ESTATES
(LEASEHOLD ESTATES)
A. Estate for years
B. Estate from year to year
C. Estate at will
D. Estate at sufferance
Note: Provide possession and
control, but not title.
RIGHTS IN THE LAND
OF ANOTHER
A. Easements
B. Profits
Note: Provide a right, but not
title or possession.
FIGURE 2.1 Estates and rights in real estate property (in descending order of importance).
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
“‘Freehold’ means
that you are ‘free to
hold’ the property.
You are the owner of
it. A leasehold estate
is anything less than
ownership.”
—Jim Hriso
© OnCourse Learning.
28 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
an easement in the land to another, or may give a license to conduct some
activity on the property to another. Some of these rights may be removed
from the bundle, leaving the other rights intact. For example, if the owner
conveyed a lease or an easement to another, the owner’s remaining rights
would be a fee simple subject to the lease or easement. Fee simple owner-
ship should not be confused with the quality of title. Ownership in fee
means that the grantee owns it forever, not that it is free of title defects.
Certainly an owner cannot expect to live forever, so the ownership con-
sists of two periods of time, from receipt of title until the owner dies, and
the period of time after the owner dies. The owner has the rights of owner-
ship and use during his lifetime and then the ownership shall convey to his
heirs (either by will or by the law of descent.).
The word “fee” denotes ownership that is inheritable. Fee simple
absolute, also known as fee simple or fee, means ownership forever
or for at least a lifetime. Because the ownership is considered “for at
least a lifetime” the use of the term “fee” does not mean that owner-
ship is free and clear of any liens. It speaks more to the quantity of
title (at least a lifetime) than to the quality (free of liens).
2. Fee simple determinable. This defeasible fee or qualified fee estate is
also an inheritable freehold estate in the form of a fee simple estate;
however, the grantor can terminate the title under certain conditions.
An example of a fee simple determinable is a situation in which a gran-
tor conveys title to a college and in the conveyance stipulates that the
title is good “so long as” the property is used for scholastic purposes.
Title received by the college can be for an infinite period of time. If the
property is not used for the purpose specified in the conveyance, how-
ever, the title will automatically terminate and revert to the original
grantor or the grantor’s heirs.
3. Fee simple subject to a condition subsequent. The fee simple subject to
a condition subsequent can continue for an infinite period, as is the
case with the fee simple absolute. The fee simple subject to a condition
subsequent also can be defeated and, therefore, is a defeasible title. The
fee simple subject to a condition subsequent is created by the grantor
(the one conveying title), who restricts the future use of the property
in some way. For example, a grantor may convey property with the
condition that it can never be used as a landfill. As long as the prop-
erty is never used for this purpose, the title will continue indefinitely
in the name of the initial grantee or any subsequent grantee. Any use
of the property for a landfill will violate the covenant in the deed and
the original grantor or her heirs may reenter the property and take
“Fee simple defeasible,
sometimes known as
a fee with a condition
subsequent or a fee
simple determinable,
can be defeated and
taken away.”
—Terry Wilson, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
29Estates in Real Property
possession or go to court and sue to regain possession. By doing so,
the titleholder’s estate is terminated.
A grantor may want to convey a title this way for several reasons. In
the case of the landfill, the owner may be protecting the property he owns
that is close to the landfill. In the case of the college, the grantor may be
highly committed to education but may not want to give up ownership
of the property for any other reason. Notice that in the case of a fee sim-
ple determinable, the estate in the grantee automatically terminates in the
event the designated use of the property is not continued or a prohibited
use is undertaken. This is contrasted with the fee simple subject to a condi-
tion subsequent, in which the termination is not automatic. In the latter
case, the grantor and/or the heirs must either reenter the property or go to
court to obtain possession of the property and to terminate the estate in
the grantee. It should be noted that qualified fee or use conditions based
on race, color, sex, national origin, familial status, handicap, or religion are
void because they are against public policy; therefore, if a qualified fee or
use condition based on any of these factors appears as a condition of title,
the title is really a fee simple absolute.
B. Estates pur autre vie (for the life of another). These estates are measured by
the lifetime of a person other than the person receiving the title. They may
be willed or inherited by heirs of the life estate grantee if the grantee dies
before the person who is the measuring life. These rights should not be
confused with the more traditional, and noninheritable, conventional life
estates. The pur autre vie is an inheritable right, should the life interest per-
son die before the measuring life person deceases.
For example, Dad may grant title to his son for as long as Mom (his
widow) is still alive. If the son dies before Mom, the title to the life
estate pur autre vie would pass to the son’s heirs, such as a grandson
or a granddaughter. Therefore, the life estate is not only for the dura-
tion of the son’s life, but will last until Mom’s death, as hers is still the
measuring life. At Mom’s death, the life estate terminates.
II ESTATES NOT OF INHERITANCE
Estates not of inheritance are good only for the life of the tenant (free-
hold) and do not pass on to his heirs, but rather are disposed of by some
other method.
In addition to being created by an intentional conveyance, life estates
also can be created by operation of law. Life estates created by act of the
parties are called conventional life estates, whereas life estates created by
operation of law are called marital life estates.
A. Conventional life estates (estate for tenant’s own life). A life estate is a non-
inheritable freehold estate. It is created only for the life of the named life
© OnCourse Learning.
30 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
tenant; that is, one who holds a life estate. The question arises as to what will
happen to the estate at the death of the life tenant. If nothing else is specified
in the conveyance of the life estate, it will revert to the grantor or to his heirs
at the death of the life tenant. The grantor or his heirs thus would have a
reversionary interest in this case (see Figure 2.2). Alternatively, the convey-
ance of the life estate could specify that the estate pass on to someone other
than the grantor or his heirs. This person would be called a remainderman
and has a remainder, or future, interest in the property. After the death of
the life tenant, the remainderman would then have title in fee simple abso-
lute (see Figure 2.3).
B. Marital life estates. A marital life estate is created in North Carolina by
the intestate succession statutes governing the distribution of prop-
erty of one who dies intestate, that is, dies without leaving a valid
Testator/Grantor Grantee (life tenant)
Heirs
Upon grantee’s death, title reverts
to grantor or testator’s estate
when no remaindermen are named.
Escheat
(if no will and
no heirs)
FIGURE 2.2 Life estate in reversion.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
Grantor (in a deed)
or
Testator (in a will)
Grantee Remaindermen
Example:
Grandfather To son
for life
(life tenant)
Then to grandson
(remainderman)
in fee simple
To heirs if remainderman
predeceases life tenant
Escheat to the state
if no heirs
FIGURE 2.3 Life estate in remainder.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
“Do not memorize
that a remainderman
means a 3rd party. It
is better to remember
that any time a life
estate ends and the
reversionary interest
does not return to the
grantor then a remain-
der interest exists.”
—Len Elder, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
31Estates in Real Property
will. This statute allows the surviving spouse to choose a life estate in
one-third of the real property owned in severalty (sole ownership) by
the deceased spouse at any time during the marriage under certain
conditions. If the surviving spouse is entitled to any property of the
deceased spouse through a will or intestate succession statutes and
the surviving spouse has not joined in the transfer of such property
by signing the deed, the surviving spouse must forfeit any interest in
the deceased spouse’s property resulting from a will or an inheritance
to claim her marital estate. Few surviving spouses elect the marital
life estate option because it is seldom advantageous for them to do so.
Several important points pertain to marital life estates:
• A will cannot defeat the marital interest of a surviving spouse.
• Statutes do not apply to property owned as tenants by the entirety.
• A surviving spouse has a choice of either marital life estate or
property of the deceased spouse willed to the surviving spouse.
From these requirements, you can see that it is extremely important for both
husband and wife to join in the conveyance of any property owned by either of
them while they are married. Otherwise, the grantee’s title could be affected by a
marital interest of the surviving spouse.
Some states still provide dower and curtesy rights to a surviving spouse. Dower
is the wife’s right and curtesy is the husband’s right to a life estate in the property
owned by a deceased spouse during the marriage. North Carolina’s intestate suc-
cession statutes abolished dower and curtesy rights and provided a substitute,
which sets forth the manner in which the property of an intestate (one who has
died without leaving a valid will) is distributed to the heirs.
Rights and responsibilities of life tenants. A life tenant has the right of alienation.
That is, the life tenant can transfer her title to another person or pledge the title as security
for a debt. Of course, the individual cannot give a title for a duration longer than her
life or the life of the person named in the creation of a life estate to establish its dura-
tion. The life tenant also has the right to the net income produced by the property,
if any. The life tenant can legally mortgage the life estate. It is unlikely that a lend-
ing institution would accept a life estate as security for a mortgage, however, because
the estate terminates on the death of the life tenant. If the life tenant were able to do
this, however, she would be responsible for the principal and interest on that mortgage
note. An outstanding mortgage on the property is the responsibility of the grantor or
the remainderman, and the life tenant must pay the interest but not the principal.
A life tenant has certain responsibilities. He must not commit waste and
must preserve the estate for the benefit of the remainderman or for the person
who holds the reversionary interest. Otherwise, the life tenant is not answer-
able to the future holder of the estate. The life tenant has a legal right called
the right to estovers, which allows him to cut and use a reasonable amount of
© OnCourse Learning.
32 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
timber from the land to repair buildings or to use it for fuel, but does not allow
the tenant to cut and sell the timber for profit. A violation of the right of esto-
vers is called an act of waste.
A life tenant has an obligation to pay the real property taxes on the property
in which he has a life estate. The tenant also has the duty to pay any assessments
levied against the property by a county or municipality for improvements to the
property. Assessments are levied against land for improvements made to the land,
such as paving streets and laying water and sewer lines.
The life tenant also has a duty to make repairs to the improvements on the land.
He cannot permit the property to deteriorate because of lack of repairs and thus
cause depreciation to existing improvements.
Many states recognize the primary home as a sort of life estate that can pro-
vide some degree of protection from creditors. The North Carolina Home-
stead Exemption Law protects an amount of interest, or equity, in the debtor’s
personal residence, whether it is real or personal property, from creditors in
the event of lawsuits, including bankruptcy filings. The current amount of
protection is $35,000, which was increased from $18,500 in December 2009.
Additionally, this act increases the amount of protection to a maximum of
$60,000 in cases in which the resident is over the age of 65 and the property
was previously owned in tenancy by entireties, or in joint tenancy with rights
of survivorship, in which one of the former co-owners is now deceased. The
property owner is helped by this act in the event of judgment liens obtained
against her. The owner still would be obligated to pay property taxes and any
mortgage balances due.
Homestead exemptions in other states are relatively similar, although many are
more extensive than those in North Carolina.
Nonfreehold Estates
The nonfreehold estates, also known as less-than-freehold or leasehold estates,
confer a rental interest in real property. Four estates are recognized:
1. Estate for years is for any fixed period of time and automatically terminates
at the end of that period.
2. Estate from year to year is a periodic estate that automatically renews at the
end of its period if the parties do not provide otherwise.
3. An estate at will is for an indefinite time and may be terminated by either
party instantaneously by giving notice to the other party.
4. An estate at sufferance is not truly an estate but rather a holdover situa-
tion created when the tenant’s lease has expired and she fails to vacate the
premises.
These nonfreehold estates are described in more detail in Chapter 15.
© OnCourse Learning.
33Ownership of Real Property
OWNERSHIP OF REAL PROPERTY
Ownership in Severalty
When title to real property is held in the name of only one person or entity, it is called
ownership in severalty. Not to be confused with the word several, the concept of
severalty is actually a derivative from the word “sever.” The person holding title is
the sole or only owner. This is the form of ownership that a corporation likely would
have even though the corporation has many owners or stockholders (i.e., IBM Cor-
poration). The fact that title is held in severalty does not eliminate the possibility
of marital rights. This is the case when a single person acquires title to a property
in severalty and later gets married. Even though the new spouse does not have his
names on the title to the property, he still would obtain marital rights upon marriage.
Concurrent (Joint) Ownership
Simultaneous ownership of real property by two or more people is called concur-
rent ownership or co-ownership. There are various types of co-ownership, and
the rights of the owners depend on the type of ownership they have. The types of
co-ownership are tenancy in common, joint tenancy, and tenancy by the entirety.
The co-owners may hold title in the same manner as owners in severalty—for
example, fee simple absolute, fee simple subject to a condition subsequent, and
fee simple determinable.
Tenancy in Common
Tenancy in common is characterized by two or more persons holding title to a prop-
erty at the same time, with no right of survivorship. Anyone can hold title as a
tenant in common. The concept of unity of possession means that each owner
holds an undivided interest in the entire property, rather than one specific part of
it. Upon the death of a tenant in common, the deceased’s share goes to his heirs.
A tenant in common may sell his share to anybody without destroying the ten-
ancy relationship. Each tenant in common may also pledge her share of the prop-
erty as security for a loan. This creates an encumbrance against that share only,
not against the entire property. Tenants in common do not need to have the same
amount of interest in the property. For example, one tenant may hold a 50% inter-
est, with two other tenants holding 25% each. If the deed does not specify the
interest each holds, their interest will be considered equal.
A tenant in common may bring legal action to have the property partitioned
so each tenant has a specific portion of the property exclusively. If this can be done
fairly with a piece of land, each tenant receives title to a tract according to his
share of interest. If the land cannot be divided to the satisfaction of the co-owners,
the court may order its sale, with appropriate shares of the proceeds distributed
© OnCourse Learning.
34 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
to the tenants. Tenancy in common is also the form of concurrent ownership that
is recognized when either a joint tenancy, or tenancy by entireties, is destroyed
but when there are still multiple owners, such as the case when a married couple
obtains a divorce but remains in a co-ownership position.
Joint Tenancy
This form of co-ownership requires the four unities of time, title, interest,
and possession. People with joint tenancy must have the same interest in the
property, must receive their title at the same time from the same source, and
must have the same degree of undivided ownership and right to possession in
the property. For example, if there are three joint tenants, each must own an
undivided one-third interest in the property, they must all receive their title
from the same source at the same time, and they must continue to hold pos-
session concurrently.
If a joint tenant sells her share of ownership, the sale violates the requirement of
unity of time, title, interest, and possession as far as the new buyer is concerned.
Upon the sale of an interest by a joint tenant, the person buying this share does
not become a joint tenant with the other tenants, but rather joins them as a tenant
in common.
Other states, but not North Carolina, provide the concept of automatic rights of
survivorship in joint tenancies, wherein the surviving partners automatically take
over the share of a deceased partner. Today, the automatic right of survivorship is
not favored in law except in joint ownership by husband and wife as tenants by
the entirety.
As indicated in the previous paragraph, North Carolina tends not to rec-
ognize the automatic rights of survivorship, but rather requires the parties to
specifically indicate in the deed that it is to be joint tenancy with the rights
of survivorship. A common illustration might be “to Sam Smith and Tracy
Jones as joint tenants with rights of survivorship,” which shows a specific
intent. Examples such as “to Robert Bellamy and Sally Browne jointly” or to
“Angie Smith and Stephanie Clark as joint tenants” fail to expressly provide
for survivorship and therefore will not be recognized as joint tenancy but
rather tenancy in common. Additionally, in contrast to the more “national”
interpretation of joint tenancy, in 2009, North Carolina provided for the abil-
ity to have unequal ownership interests in joint tenancy as long as the right of
survivorship was clearly addressed.
The concept of joint tenancy, with rights of survivorship, is increasing in popu-
larity among unmarried couples, many of whom are not able to partake in tenancy
by entireties, as a means to acquire title and have the ownership automatically go
to the surviving member of the couple and therefore avoid the risks, costs, and
consequences of an inheritance.
“Joint Tenancy exists
where there are four
fundamental unities;
time, title, interest and
possession. Remember
TTIP.”
—Derrin Dunzweiler
© OnCourse Learning.
35Ownership of Real Property
Test Tip!
Joint tenancy ownership requires the following four unities:
• Time—Must acquire interests at the same time
• Title—Must acquire title on the same document (deed)
• Interest—Considered equal shares unless stated otherwise
• Possession—Has the right to use and possess the entire property
Tenancy by the Entirety
Ownership through tenancy by the entirety is limited to husband and wife. To
receive a title as tenants by the entirety, there must be a legal marriage at the time
that the husband and wife receive title to the property. It is not necessary for the
deed to read “to husband and wife as tenants by the entirety” to create a tenancy
by the entirety. The deed only needs to convey the property “to John A. Jones and
Mary A. Jones, who are husband and wife,” and a tenancy by the entirety is auto-
matically created. Tenancy by the entirety does contain the right of survivorship.
The surviving spouse receives title to the property automatically by operation
of law. Creation of tenancy by the entirety requires the five unities of time, title,
interest, possession, and marriage.
A husband or wife owning land as tenants by the entirety may not legally con-
vey property to a third party without the other spouse joining in the deed. There
can be no partition of real property held by tenants by the entirety.
Tenancy by the entirety exists as long as the tenants hold title to the property
and are legally married. Tenancy by the entirety is abolished by decree of divorce
or in the event of death of one of the owners. A mere legal separation is not suffi-
cient. When a final decree of absolute divorce is obtained, however, the ownership
is automatically changed to tenancy in common by operation of law, eliminating
the right of survivorship. In the event of death, the remaining spouse will now be
considered to hold title in severalty.
Married people may, if they elect to do so, own property as tenants in common.
It is not necessary for them to take title as tenants by the entirety.
In North Carolina, one spouse can purchase a property, but it usually takes the
signature of the husband and the wife to convey and give a clear title to a grantee,
regardless of how the property is held. If a mortgage or deed of trust is given
to secure a note for a property being purchased by one spouse, the lender usu-
ally requires the other spouse to sign the deed of trust or mortgage but does not
require the nonpurchasing spouse to sign the note unless that spouse’s income is
used to qualify for the loan.
Many times a property is owned by one spouse before the marriage. Upon mar-
riage, title will remain in severalty but coupled with a marital right. In another
“In North Carolina a
married individual can
take title in his or her
name alone without
the spouse having an
interest in the prop-
erty. The document
which waives and relin-
quishes the spouse’s
interest is called a Free
Trader Agreement.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
36 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
situation, a couple may have acquired title to a property together as co-owners,
such as tenancy in common or joint tenancy, before their marriage. As in the
illustration regarding severalty ownership just mentioned, the ownership does
not convert to tenancy by entireties upon marriage. The deed would have to
be conveyed by the couple, to the couple, after marriage to make it tenancy by
entireties.
Combination (Hybrid) Forms of Ownership
Condominiums
Condominium ownership is a form of ownership in real estate that is now recog-
nized in all states. North Carolina statutes define this type of ownership, set forth
the requirements for the creation of a condominium, and set special restrictions
on the offering of a condominium for sale.
A condominium purchaser receives a fee simple title to an apartment. Condo-
minium unit owners can hold ownership of their units in the same ways owners
of any freehold estate hold ownership—that is, in severalty, as tenants in com-
mon, as joint tenants, or as tenants by the entirety. Individuals, groups, and busi-
ness entities can hold ownership in condominium units in the same ways they
can hold ownership in other freehold estates, providing they meet the criteria for
the specific type of ownership. For example, only a married couple can own real
estate as tenants by the entirety. The owner can convey title by deed or leave it to
an heir by will. Condominium ownership includes ownership of the airspace of the
individual unit as well as co-ownership in the common areas of the condominium
along with the other unit owners. This co-ownership is as a tenant in common
in the common areas, including the corridors, grounds, parking areas, and rec-
reational facilities. The right to partition is waived in this tenancy in common
ownership of common areas (see Figure 2.4).
North Carolina statutes prescribe the manner in which a condominium is
to be created. This includes a declaration, bylaws, and a copy of the construc-
tion plans. To be valid, the declaration, articles, and bylaws must be recorded
on the public record in the Register of Deeds office in the county where the
property is located.
The declaration includes a legal description of the property; a plat of the prop-
erty with the location of the buildings, plans, and specifications for the build-
ings and the various units; a description of the common areas; and the degree
of ownership in the common areas available to each unit owner. It also includes
covenants, conditions, and restrictions affecting the property. It also may include
a “right of first refusal” clause, giving the association the first opportunity to pur-
chase a unit if the owner wishes to sell.
The articles of association establish an association to provide for the main-
tenance and management of the common areas and other services for the
© OnCourse Learning.
37Ownership of Real Property
owner-members. Owners, as members of the association, are assessed to pay for
these necessary services. Such assessments are usually in the form of monthly
dues, but periodic special assessments also can be levied. The bylaws set forth the
various officers in the association and the way they are elected, and they set forth
the requirements for amending the bylaws.
The creation of a condominium is not limited to residential purposes. Virtually
anything can utilize the condominium form of ownership. Other purposes may
include office space, parking space, and an industrial park. Indeed, it would seem
as the potential uses of a condominium form of ownership are limited only by the
developer’s imagination. The purpose of the condominium must be set forth in
the declaration as required by state statute.
Condominiums can also be one-story, attached, or detached units, but the indi-
vidual owner still owns only the airspace that constitutes his unit. It is not uncom-
mon that an owner may be granted exclusive use of some limited common areas
such as balconies, assigned parking spaces and storage units. All ground and
common areas are still owned as tenants in common.
A condominium unit can be mortgaged just as any other property. Federal
Housing Administration (FHA) financing has been available for condominiums
since 1961, and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) guarantees mortgage
LAND SURFACE
Owned as ten-
ants in common AREA BELOW SURFACE
Owned as tenants in common
AIR RIGHTS
Owned as tenants
in common
Building owned as
tenants in common
Units
exclusively
owned
Condominiums can also be one-story, attached, or detached units, but the individual owner
still owns only the airspace that constitutes his unit. All ground and common areas are still
owned as tenants in common.
FIGURE 2.4 Condominium ownership.
© OnCourse Learning.
38 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
loans for the purchase of condominiums. A condominium project must have
FHA or VA approval before FHA will make loans on any of the units. FHA fur-
ther requires that condominium projects have a specified percentage of owner-
occupancy before FHA will make a loan on any of the units. The occupancy rate
is monitored. That percentage can vary by region.
The North Carolina Condominium Act (1986) sets specific requirements on offer-
ing for sale or resale a condominium created on or after October 1, 1986, although
these rights can be waived, and typically are, when the condo is used for nonresiden-
tial purposes. Essentially, the act offers the following consumer protections (these
protections apply only to condominiums, not to townhouses or PUDs).
1. Public offering statement: The developer must provide a public offering state-
ment to the prospective buyer of a new condominium before the contract
is signed. The North Carolina Condominium Act requires that the devel-
oper disclose certain information pertaining to the condominium project,
including the purchaser’s right to cancel. The public offering statement is not
required for resale of units.
2. Purchaser’s right to cancel: A purchaser has the right to cancel, absolutely
and without penalty, the purchase of a new condominium unit from the
developer for any reason during the first seven days after signing the con-
tract. Title cannot pass during this seven-day period. Like the public offer-
ing statement, the purchaser’s right to cancel does not apply to resale units.
3. Escrow of deposit: Any deposits made by the purchaser must remain in the
developer’s or his agent’s escrow account the full seven days, unless the pur-
chaser cancels the contract earlier. In that case, the money is to be refunded
to the purchaser. All escrow accounts must be held in an insured bank or
savings and loan in North Carolina.
4. Resale certificates: When reselling a condominium built on or after October
1, 1986, the unit’s owner or owner’s agent must provide a resale certificate to
the purchasers that discloses monthly assessment for the common areas and
other fees for which unit owners are responsible. A public offering statement
or a right to cancel is not required for resale of a unit.
5. Warranties: There is an implied warranty that the unit is constructed in an
acceptable manner, free from defects, and suitable for the purpose intended
unless there is an agreement to the contrary or the warranty has been dis-
claimed in such a manner as to make it void.
The agent must provide his client with a public offering statement if the client
is purchasing a new condominium or a resale certificate if reselling a unit subject
to this statute. Failure to do so violates the agency relationship and, therefore, the
Real Estate License Law. It also leaves the agent potentially liable to the purchaser
in civil court.
© OnCourse Learning.
39Ownership of Real Property
Test Tip!
• New condominium sales require a public offering statement and contain
rescission dates.
• A resale condominium requires a property disclosure statement and a
resale certificate and does not contain rescission dates.
Townhouse Ownership
The townhouse form of ownership is somewhat different from the con-
dominium form in that the townhouse provides for the ownership of the unit
as well as the specific portion of land upon which the individual unit is located.
Because each unit rests on its own foundation and its own piece of land, it cannot
have another unit above it. A townhouse is, therefore, a vertical structure that is
attached horizontally to other units, which also rest on their own foundations.
The townhouse may be two or three stories, but all the stories are part of one unit.
This is in contrast to condominium units, which are attached vertically but whose
horizontal stacks of units share a foundation and ground.
There is another significant difference in the ownership of the common grounds.
Because the townhouse owner owns the land of his specific unit, the owners asso-
ciation owns the remainder of the common areas, such as the walks and swim-
ming pool, in severalty. This is different from condominium ownership, in which
the owners association owns nothing itself because the owners own the common
elements together as tenants in common. Maintenance is provided by periodic
fees and assessments that are charged to the individual unit owners.
Cooperatives
Ownership in a cooperative (co-op) results from ownership of shares of stock in a
corporation that owns a building containing cooperative apartments. The right of
stockholders to occupy an apartment is provided by a proprietary lease and there-
fore there is no deed. The only real property interest of the stockholders is a lease-
hold estate providing the right to possession of an apartment. The stockholders,
as lessees, pay no rent but do pay an assessment to cover the cost of maintaining
and operating the building, real property taxes, and debt service if there is a mort-
gage against the building. The owners’ rights and obligations are specified in the
lease and the stock certificate. Proprietary lease tenants do not “own” real prop-
erty. The cooperative ownership requires that prospective purchasers are voted
© OnCourse Learning.
40 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
on to determine whether they will be allowed to purchase the share of stock and
be allowed to occupy the unit. Because the purchaser is purchasing only shares of
stock, as opposed to actual ownership of real property, this is not in violation of
federal fair housing laws. Co-ops involving ownership of real property are not a
popular form of ownership in North Carolina but are a common form of owner-
ship in some larger metropolitan areas around the country.
Time Sharing
Time sharing is a fairly recent innovation. North Carolina has specific statutes
defining and regulating time-shares. Time sharing is defined as any right to occupy a
property for five or more separated time periods over a span of five or more years. Any
interest meeting this definition is classified as real property, and the laws pertain-
ing to real estate transactions apply. Article IV of the Real Estate License Law sets
specific regulations on the sale of time-share property. The developer must obtain
a registration certificate from the Real Estate Commission before offering the units
for sale to the public, and all people selling an interest in a time-share must have a
real estate license. Additionally, purchasers must be given a public offering state-
ment meeting North Carolina Real Estate Commission guidelines before a contract
is signed and must have a five-day right of rescission after executing such a con-
tract. See Appendix C for rules and regulations for time-shares and real estate laws.
Time sharing is a type of real estate innovation that allows participants to acquire
the right to occupy a unit of real estate, most likely a resort, for a brief period of
time. Because most people are unable to take more than a week to few weeks of
vacation time each year this has become a popular method for people who prefer to
pay only for the time they use. Unfortunately, this type of conveyance has created
many problems, including high-pressure sales tactics that have left many people
regretting the purchase almost immediately afterward. Numerous examples exist
in which conveyances were never recorded and liens were not paid off. As a result,
North Carolina has adopted numerous laws and rules pertaining to time-shares.
Test Tip!
Students should be aware that time-shares are tested in two different areas of
the exam. They may be tested on for Chapter 2 as well as under License Law.
Because of that importance, the following list gives the most important ele-
ments of these rules.
Key Time-Share Facts for North Carolina
• A time-share is considered to be five or more separate time periods spread
over a period of at least five years.
• All time-shares are considered real property.
“North Carolina Stat-
ute 93A-39-58 found
in Appendix C in the
textbook contains
significant detail on
timeshares that is on
the course syllabus.
Read this statute in
conjunction with the
material in the Adven-
ture Guide regarding
timeshares.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
41Ownership of Real Property
• All persons selling, or attempting to sell time-shares in North Carolina must
have a valid active real estate license.
• There is no separate time-share license.
• There is no exemption for employee of developer status.
• The developer must obtain a certificate of registration from the North Caro-
lina Real Estate Commission.
• The developer must record a time-share instrument (1) no less than 6 days
nor more than 45 days from date of purchase, and (2) no more than 180 days
from the date of sale if monies were paid to an independent escrow agent at
the end of the 10-day period.
• The developer must give the purchaser the public offering statement by the
date of purchase.
• The time-share contract is voidable without penalty for five days from con-
tract of sale.
• Monies collected on the time-share purchase must be deposited immedi-
ately within 10 days upon receipt.
• Such payments are considered to belong to the purchaser and not to the
developer during this period.
• If the developer, or his or her agent, fails to give the purchaser a copy of the
public offering statement by the date of purchase: the purchaser may obtain
from the developer an amount equal to 10% of the purchase price not to
exceed $3,000; and (2) the North Carolina Real Estate Commission can fine
the developer $500 for each violation. NOTE: Only the developer can be
fined and not the salesperson.
• Time-share projects must have a time-share registrar and no sales may be
made until such registrar has been designated.
• The developer also must designate a project broker.
• The project broker must supervise both brokers and provisional brokers li-
censees at the project location.
• Upon cancellation of the time-share contract, all refunds shall be made no
later than 30 days from the date of purchase (not cancellation).
Trusts
A trust is an arrangement whereby a person’s assets are being held by a third party
(trustee) for the benefit of that person (trustor). This trustee is quite often a bank,
attorney, or another person. This arrangement is considered to be a fiduciary rela-
tionship and often will involve real property. One of the distinct advantages of
such a trust is that it allows property to pass outside of probate as well as provides
privacy. In probate, the courts will want to verify the validity of the will, obtain an
inventory and value of any property, pay relevant debts, and then distribute any
© OnCourse Learning.
42 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
remaining assets to the appropriate parties, such as the heirs. Another advantage
of creating such a trust is that it allows much of this to be taken care of in advance,
thereby relieving the executor, or administrator, of estate of tasks with which they
may have little experience.
Living trusts often are referred to as “revocable trusts” and are created during
the lifetime of the person setting up the trust. These documents place assets into
a trust for a person’s benefit during their lifetime and then transfer the assets to a
designated beneficiary at death.
Testamentary trusts often involve the leaving of assets to children or others in
cases in which the distribution may be set to occur at a particular time, such as a
30th birthday, or when a specific event, such as graduation from college or mar-
riage, occurs. This type of trust often involves potentially large sums of money
that may not be acquired by the person setting up the trust until their death, such
as life insurance proceeds.
Land trusts are agreements in which the trustee agrees to hold ownership of real
property for the benefit of the trustor. One of the benefits of this type arrangement is
that it potentially provides privacy for the person who owns the property.
It is entirely possible that the recipient of a trust may be able to act only
through the actions of the trustee. It is not unheard of for a future recipient (ben-
eficiary) to represent to another person their desire to dispose of assets that are
not yet within the control of that recipient. For example a person wants to sell a
parcel of real property she “inherited” and is willing to sign the listing agreement.
In this situation, the broker will need to determine whether the beneficiary actu-
ally has the right to sell independently or if the trustee must be willing to allow
the conveyance.
ENCUMBRANCES TO REAL PROPERTY
An encumbrance is anything that diminishes the bundle of rights of real prop-
erty. As such, it is usually considered a burden on the property. Charges, claims,
restrictions, or infringements on a property reduce its overall value in some man-
ner. In some instances, however, an encumbrance has a positive effect on the
value of the property; one example might be a restrictive covenant, discussed
later in this chapter. Therefore, an encumbrance can affect value either positively
or negatively.
This section discusses liens, easements, and encroachments. Chapter 5 dis-
cusses other land use controls, such as zoning ordinances and deed restrictions.
Liens
A lien is a claim or a charge against the property that can result from a contrac-
tual agreement or from the operation of law. For example, a lien can result from
an owner’s contracting to have work done on property and not fulfilling part of
© OnCourse Learning.
43Encumbrances to Real Property
the contract, from the owner’s failure to pay taxes, or as a result of a lawsuit. A
lien creates a cloud on the title. If this claim is not satisfied in the required time,
the lien holder may execute the lien by process of foreclosure, which forces the
property to be sold at public auction. Proceeds of the foreclosure sale are applied
to outstanding liens in the order of priority of the liens, which is discussed later
in this chapter.
Liens fall into two groups, which are shown in Figure 2.5:
1. Specific liens are claims against a specific property, such as mortgages, prop-
erty taxes, and mechanic’s liens.
2. General liens are claims against a person or that person’s property, such as
judgment liens, personal property tax liens, income tax liens, and estate and
inheritance tax liens.
Specific Liens
Mortgage liens. A mortgage or deed of trust pledges a specific property,
such as a home, as security for a debt. If the borrower does not pay the debt
as promised (defaults), the lender can foreclose the mortgage by having the
property sold at public auction and applying the proceeds of the sale to the
debt.
Real property (ad valorem) tax and special assessment liens. The taxes levied by
a local government constitute a specific lien against the real estate. State laws pro-
vide that real property tax liens have priority over all other liens. An assessment is
a levy, or tax, against a property for payment of a share of the cost of improvements
made to areas adjoining the property. Examples of these improvements are paving
streets, installing sewer or water lines, and constructing sidewalks. Special assess-
ments constitute a specific lien against the property until paid. Ad valorem and
special tax liens are valid for 10 years.
1. Specific Liens: Claims against a particular property
a. Mortgage
b. Real property tax and special assessment
c. Mechanic’s
2. General Liens: Claims against all assets of a person
a. Judgment
b. Personal property tax
c. Income tax
d. Estate and inheritance tax
FIGURE 2.5 Classification of liens.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
“Liens are categorized
as specific and general.
Specific liens are
‘specific’ because they
are tied to a particular
individual property.”
—Len Elder, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
44 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Mechanic’s liens. In North Carolina, the term mechanic’s (materialman or
laborer) lien includes a lien filed by anyone (such as carpenters, lumber com-
panies, appraisers, and surveyors) who provides labor or material to a prop-
erty or property improvement. If these people are not paid according to the
terms of their contract, they can file a lien against the property to which they
provided work or materials any time up to 120 days after the last day that any
labor or material was furnished to the property. The mechanic’s lien is unique
in that when it is filed, it becomes effective as of the first day any labor or mate-
rial was furnished rather than on the day the lien is recorded. The mechanic’s
lien holder has up to 180 days after the last labor or materials were furnished
to take court action to enforce her lien, provided she filed the lien within the
120-day filing period. The Statute of Limitations sets the time limit for the fil-
ing of lawsuits in various situations. If a lawsuit is not filed within the statutory
time period, the injured party loses the right of legal remedy by operation of
law. Therefore, the mechanic’s lien must be filed within the statutory period. The
special treatment the mechanic’s lien receives as to effective date makes it neces-
sary to verify that all work done on a property within 120 days before closing has
been paid for. The mechanic’s lien is the one type of lien that may not show up
in a title search but, once subsequently recorded, would constitute a valid lien
on the property. To avoid the risks of mechanic’s liens being filed at a later date,
most lenders will require the seller to produce a lien waiver in which the parties,
who have produced labor or materials within the statutory period of time, have
signed a document stating that they will waive their rights to file a lien against
the property.
Legislation, effective April 1, 2013, applies to projects for which the antici-
pated cost exceeds $30,000 at the time of permitting. This law requires the
owner to designate a “lien agent” to whom the lien claimants will be required
to give notice. Anyone with a potential claim will be afforded a 15-day period
from beginning work or risk loss of the mechanic lien priority. This new law
does not apply to situations involving an existing single-family residence that
is owner occupied.
Commercial Real Estate Broker Lien
North Carolina enacted the Commercial Real Estate Broker Lien Act effective
October 1, 2011. This act enabled the commercial broker/firm to be able to file a
lien to protect their claim to a sales or leasing commission. This became neces-
sary because commercial brokers often have invested long periods of time and
large sums of money in a transaction that can result in large amounts of monies
due for the commission. As a result, commission disputes can arise that cannot
be resolved before the closing date. Further compounding the problem is the fact
that the broker generally had no right to place a lien on the property and had vir-
tually no “leverage” to force the owner to pay after the title was transferred. The
“Mechanic’s liens are
retroactive to the
FIRST day the con-
tractor, subcontrac-
tor, or supplier began
work or provided labor
or materials to the
property.”
—Steve Robinson
© OnCourse Learning.
45Encumbrances to Real Property
primary avenue available to the broker was to file a suit, which often resulted in
long periods of costly litigation.
As a result, this legislation was passed allowing the broker/firm to file a lien for
the earned commission in sales or lease transactions. This ability to file a lien is
limited to only the listing broker/firm who had the written agreement to sell or
lease the property as opposed to the cooperating broker/firm. The lien must be
filed before the title is transferred in a sale and can be filed up to 30 days before
the closing or by the date of possession in a lease. Once the lien has been filed, the
broker/firm has up to 18 months to file a suit to enforce the lien.
General Liens
Judgment liens. A judgment is a court decree establishing that one person is
indebted to another and specifying the amount of that indebtedness. A judgment
lien constitutes a general lien against all real and personal property the judgment
debtor owns in the county in which the judgment is recorded. The lien takes effect
from the time the judgment is recorded. A judgment creditor may record a judg-
ment in any county in the state, and it will constitute a general lien against all of
the judgment debtor’s property in that county. The creditor also may file notice of
the lien in other counties where the debtor may own property and be protected
for the debt in those counties as well. The judgment also creates a lien against any
property the judgment debtor acquires subsequent to the judgment during the
existence of the judgment.
A general lien does not apply to real property owned by husband and wife by
the entirety or as joint tenants if the judgment is against only one of them. For the
lien to attach to property in such cases, the judgment must be obtained against
husband and wife on a debt they both incurred. A judgment lien remains in effect
for 10 years in North Carolina unless the judgment is paid. Judgments may be
renewed and kept in force for an additional period if the creditor brings another
action on the original judgment before the original period has elapsed. Judgment
liens have a priority relationship based on the time of recording. The creditor who
records a lien before another creditor records a lien against the same judgment
debtor has a higher priority claim. The judgment debtor’s obligation to the credi-
tor who has priority must be satisfied before creditors with a lower priority. Judg-
ment liens are enforced by an order called an execution. This is an order signed
by the clerk of court that instructs the sheriff to sell the property of the judgment
debtor and apply the proceeds of the sale to the satisfaction of the judgment.
Personal property tax liens. Personal property taxes are assessed on certain per-
sonal property owned as of January 1 of the tax year. If these taxes are not paid,
they become a general lien against all of the property the individual owns. Like
the real property tax lien, this lien takes priority over other liens. The tax on
licensed motor vehicles no longer constitutes a lien on real property.
© OnCourse Learning.
46 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Federal tax liens. The U.S. IRS can create a general lien against all of a taxpayer’s
property for overdue federal taxes. This lien is created by obtaining a judgment
in a federal court against the taxpayer and by filing a certificate of lien against the
landowner in the office of the clerk of the superior court in the county in which
the taxpayer’s land is located. A federal tax lien does not have a special priority. Its
priority is established by time of recording, and its validity extends for 10 years.
The federal government imposes a tax on the estate of deceased persons, which
is called the federal estate tax. This tax creates a lien that attaches to all real and
personal property in the estate and continues until the tax is paid.
State tax liens. The NC Commissioner of Revenue can create a general lien against
all of a taxpayer’s property for overdue state taxes. This lien becomes effective
from the time of docketing in the superior court clerk’s office in the county where
the delinquent taxpayer’s property is located and remains effective for 10 years.
All states impose a state inheritance tax upon the inheritance of real and per-
sonal property. This tax is paid by the heirs to the estate and remains a lien on the
property until it is paid. The estate can sell property to satisfy the tax bill.
Priority of Liens
The priority of most liens in relation to other liens is based on the time (day and
hour) they were recorded. North Carolina practices this “pure race system.” This
system provides that liens are established in priority by the time they are recorded—
that is, the person who wins the race to the courthouse is at the head of the list.
When the proceeds from the foreclosure sale are distributed, the lien holder with
the highest priority gets paid first. With the exception of lien holders with special
priority, the first to record is the first to be paid. However, certain liens have special
priority by North Carolina statute, as is the case with mechanic’s liens, where lien
priority relates to the first day of work on the job rather than to the date of recorda-
tion. The highest priority of all liens is given to liens for real property taxes.
Homestead Exemption
North Carolina has a law that prevents the homeowner from total loss in the
event of bankruptcy. Homeowners may exempt up to $35,000 ($70,000 for mar-
ried couples filing jointly) of their home or any other real or personal property
protected by the NC homestead exemption. If the homeowner is 65 or older and
the spouse is deceased, the exemption protects up to $60,000 if the property was
owned as tenancy by entirety or as joint tenancy with rights of survivorship.
Writ of Attachment
North Carolina allows a type of pre-judgment right to creditors called a writ of
attachment. This right exists for creditors of debts, other than mortgages, and is
obtained as the result of a judgment being passed down in a court of law against
the debtor. By obtaining the writ of attachment, the creditor makes certain
the debtor’s property will be available to satisfy the debt once the judgment is
“If there is a foreclo-
sure the cost of the
sale is always paid first,
then real estate taxes,
then special assess-
ments, and then other
liens based on the
order of recordation,
except mechanic’s
liens which have a
priority based on when
the work was begun.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
47Encumbrances to Real Property
finalized. Upon obtaining the judgment, the sheriff will be instructed to sell the
property to satisfy the debt.
Restrictive (Protective) Covenants
Restrictive (protective) covenants are private restrictions that limit the way land
may be used. They attach to the land, and they pass with title to successive pur-
chasers. Often a developer defines such covenants to establish characteristics of a
new residential subdivision. They may limit construction to single-family homes
on a specific lot size, or they may require a given size or type of architecture.
Agents, and consumers alike, should be cautious that restrictive covenants in a
given subdivision can change within different areas of the development. The cov-
enants can address anything that is legal. Careful consideration should go into
establishing restrictive covenants because property becomes more difficult to sell
as the number of restrictions increases. The restrictions may be written in the indi-
vidual deed or recorded as a master instrument, a declaration of restrictions.
Lis Pendens
This notice of pending litigation indicates the existence of an unresolved lawsuit
that affects title to all or part of the property of the defendant. Recording of the lis
pendens (lawsuit pending) provides constructive, or effective, notice of the forth-
coming legal action and its possible outcome. As a result, if the property is trans-
ferred to a new owner after the notice of lis pendens is placed on the public record
in the county where the property is located, any court order or lien resulting from
the lawsuit will affect the new owner’s title to the property. Notices of lis pendens
are routinely filed in boundary dispute cases.
Easements
An easement is a nonpossessory right or interest in land owned by another. It pro-
vides a right of use in land and not a right of possession.
General Classification of Easements
Easements can exist for a variety of legal uses, such as right-of-way for ingress
and egress; a party wall; the right to take water from the land of another; the right
to receive air, light, or heat from above the land of another; the right to obtain
water from a well or spring on the land of another; and a right-of-way for the
purpose of putting utility lines under and above the surface of the land.
Appurtenant Easement
An appurtenance is something that has been added to something else and, as a
result, becomes an inherent part of that to which it has been added. In real prop-
erty law, an appurtenance is the right that one property owner has in the prop-
erty of another as a result of the first property owner’s ownership in a particular
© OnCourse Learning.
48 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
parcel of real estate. For example, if a purchaser receives a title to a tract of land
and included in this title is an easement in the form of a right-of-way across the
adjoining land of another, this easement is an appurtenance to that title. When-
ever the titleholder conveys that title to another, the conveyance includes the ease-
ment because the easement is appurtenant to the title. Because an appurtenant
easement moves with a title, it is said to run with the land. The land that is ben-
efited by the easement is described as the dominant tenement, dominant land, or
dominant estate, and the land encumbered by the easement (the land on which
the easement exists) is described as the servient tenement, servient land, or servi-
ent estate (see Figure 2.6).
Easements in Gross
Unlike appurtenant easements, easements in gross are not dependent upon own-
ership of an adjoining property. Easements in gross have no dominant tenement,
only a servient one. Typically, the owner of an easement in gross does not neces-
sarily own property in the area of the property in which the easement exists. The
owner of an easement in gross usually receives an easement by contract.
The most prevalent use of easements in gross is in the form of commercial ease-
ments. Commercial easements are common throughout the United States and
typically are held by utility companies for the purpose of installing power lines,
telephone lines, and gas lines above the surface of the earth, on the earth itself, or
underground. Railroad rights-of-way are another prominent example of a com-
mercial easement. These commercial easements are typically for long periods of
time, perhaps indefinitely, and are binding on future owners of the servient estate.
Commercial easements in gross are assignable and can be conveyed.
A
Servient estate
Easement appurtenant
Driveway
B
Dominant estate
FIGURE 2.6 An example of an appurtenant easement.
“There must be at
least two parcels for an
easement appurtenant
since they always ben-
efit an adjacent parcel.
Only one parcel is
technically required
for an easement in
gross since it benefits
a third party.”
—Steve Robinson
© OnCourse Learning.
49Encumbrances to Real Property
Personal easements in gross are a form of personal, nonassignable, and unin-
heritable rights to use a property for a particular purpose or for the duration
of the recipient’s life unless stated otherwise. Many personal easements are not
recorded and therefore are not enforceable against the grantor. If recorded, how-
ever, the easement would be binding upon any future owner of the servient prop-
erty for as long as the easement exists. Personal easements are not to be confused
with a license agreement. A license agreement is the right to occupy a property
only for a relatively brief period of time and is not considered to be a conveyance
of binding property rights. Examples of a license agreement would be tickets to
a movie or sporting event where the holder’s right is for only the duration of the
named event.
Creation of Easements
Easements may be created by the use of an express written agreement, may be
implied by the actions of a person, or may be created by the operation of law
(see Figure 2.7). The Statute of Frauds requires that all transfers of interest in real
property be in writing; therefore, an express easement cannot be created orally.
Express Easements
Express easements must be in writing according to the Statute of Frauds and
should be recorded. An owner selling his land can expressly grant an easement
to a buyer by using the appropriate language in the deed. In Figure 2.6, if A sold
the land to B, A could grant the easement to B to cross A’s land. If the situation
were reversed, and B sold the land to A, B would reserve the easement. The party
walls illustrated in Figure 2.8 are another example of express written easements.
A party wall is used by two adjoining neighbors to support the sidewall of each unit.
If the property line ran down the middle of the wall, each party would have a
cross easement in the other or would have a tenancy in common. If the wall were
1. Express (must be in writing according to statute of frauds)
a. Grant or reserve
b. Party walls
c. Dedication
2. Implied (actions of the parties)
a. Necessity
b. Reference to a recorded plat
3. Operation of law (court order)
a. Prescription
b. Condemnation
FIGURE 2.7 The way easements arise.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
© OnCourse Learning.
50 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
entirely within the property of one party, however, the other party would have an
easement in the use of the wall. Easements may be created by express dedication,
in which a portion of a property is set aside for use by the public. For example, a
developer who is building a residential subdivision may dedicate a portion of the
land for use by the public, such as roadways or recreational parks.
Implied Easements
In contrast to express easements, implied easements have no documentation. In
certain cases, the actions of a party create an easement when these actions dem-
onstrate an intent to create an easement. An easement by necessity is implied if a
seller conveys title to a buyer who would be landlocked without access to a road.
In Figure 2.6, if A sold the property to B and did not grant B the easement shown,
B would have the right to claim such an easement by reason of the necessity to get
to the public road. An easement by dedication may be implied as well as express.
If the developer described in the preceding section had not expressly granted the
roadways in the new subdivision but had described the property by referring to a
map showing the existence of such streets, the easement would be implied.
Easements by Operation of Law
An easement may be obtained by prescription, that is, by using another’s land for a
prescribed period of time. The use must be open and well known to others (notori-
ous) and must be continued and uninterrupted for the period of time required
by laws of the state. Users must prove in court that they have satisfied all the
requirements for the intended use. An easement also can be created by condem-
nation under the power of eminent domain of the government. This power ena-
bles the government to take private land for the benefit of the general public. In
all cases, the property owner must be compensated for differences in value before
and after the action by the government. Usually, condemnations for rights-of-way
Party wall
|—|
Property Line—Tenancy in Common Property Line—Easement
Party wall
|—|
FIGURE 2.8 Party wall.
© OnCourse Learning.
51Summary of Important Points
for various public uses are for the purpose of obtaining an easement rather than
for acquiring title.
A statutory cartway proceeding is another easement that can arise by operation
of law. The owner of a landlocked parcel of property can petition to have a cartway
sectioned off over someone else’s property. A three-person jury decides where the
cartway is to be and what damages the owner of the landlocked property must
pay the owners of the land where the cartway is located. Specific statutes govern
this proceeding. A cartway of at least 18 feet in width may be obtained to connect
the landlocked property to a public highway if the cartway is for the purpose of
cultivation or for using the land for one of the purposes listed in the statute.
Termination of Easements
Easements may be terminated as follows: by the release of the easement by the domi-
nant owner to the servient owner, by combining the dominant and servient lands into
one tract of land, by abandonment of the easement by the dominant owner, by the
cessation of the purpose for which an easement was created, and by the expiration of
a specified period of time for which the easement was created.
Encroachments
An encroachment is a trespass on the land of another as a result of an intrusion or
invasion by some structure or other object, such as a wall, fence, overhanging bal-
cony, or driveway. The encroaching owner may obtain title to the area of the land
upon which the encroachment exists by adverse possession (discussed in Chap-
ter 4) or may obtain an easement by prescription in the case of the encroach-
ing driveway if the owner of the land subject to the encroachment does not take
appropriate legal action. Because encroachments are illegal, the owner who is
being encroached upon can sue for damages (a judgment by the court requiring
the encroacher to compensate the owner for the encroachment) or can petition
the court for a decree ordering the encroachment to be removed.
Encroachments caused by building improvements straddling property bound-
aries are a major reason why lending institutions require surveys that specify
the location of all improvements on the property. Typically, the existence of an
encroachment is established by an accurate survey.
Summary of Important Points
1. Real property consists of land and everything attached to the land, includ-
ing things that grow naturally without requiring planting and cultivation.
Real property ownership is often described as a bundle of rights because it
involves many attributes.
© OnCourse Learning.
52 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
2. Annual crops that require planting and cultivation are personal property
and are called emblements or fructus industriales.
3. Ownership in land includes the surface of the earth and the areas above and
below the surface.
4. A fixture begins as personal property and becomes real property when
attached to land improvements or the land. Since fixtures create many prac-
tical problems in real estate transactions, practitioners need to pay careful
attention to this concept.
5. Private ownership of property is subject to four powers of government: emi-
nent domain, police power, taxation, and escheat.
6. Estates involve the definition of the scope of one’s interest in real property. Estates
in land are divided into two groups: freehold and estates of less than freehold
(leasehold). In freehold estates, one has an ownership interest in realty that lasts
at least a lifetime. The nonfreehold, or rental, interests last less than a lifetime.
7. The freehold estates are the fee simple estates, which are inheritable, and
life estates, which are not inheritable unless the life estate is for the life of
another (pur autre vie).
8. The most comprehensive form of ownership in real property is fee simple
absolute.
9. Life estates revert to the grantor or pass on to a remainderman.
10. The duration of a life estate is measured by the life of the life tenant.
11. Conventional life estates are created by someone’s intentional act. Legal life
estates, such as marital life estates, are created by operation of law.
12. A life tenant has the right of alienation, the right of encumbrance, the right
of estovers, and the rights of possession and enjoyment of the property and
of deriving certain income from it.
13. A life tenant is obligated to preserve and maintain the property for the ben-
efit of the future interest.
14. Title held in the name of one person only is called ownership in severalty.
15. When title is held concurrently by two or more persons or organizations, it
is called co-ownership (also, concurrent, or joint ownership). The forms of
co-ownership are tenancy in common, joint tenancy, tenancy by the entirety,
and certain aspects of condominiums and cooperatives.
16. Joint tenancy and tenancy by the entirety require the four unities of time,
title, interest, and possession. Tenancy by the entirety is limited to hus-
band and wife and requires a fifth unity, marriage (or unity of person), and
includes the right of survivorship.
17. The owner of a condominium unit holds title to the unit either in severalty
or as a co-owner with another, and she and any co-owners of the individual
unit hold title to the common areas as a tenant in common with the owners
of the other units.
© OnCourse Learning.
53Summary of Important Points
18. The creation of a condominium requires the recording of a declaration, arti-
cles of association, bylaws, and construction plans.
19. The North Carolina Condominium Act applies to the sale or resale of con-
dominiums created on or after October 1, 1986. This act provides consumer
protection by requiring a developer to disclose certain information on new
condominiums before a contract is signed, allowing the purchaser of a new
condominium a seven-day right to cancel the purchase, requiring owners of
resale units to disclose monthly assessments and other fees, and providing
an implied warranty that the unit is constructed in an acceptable manner.
20. Ownership in a cooperative results from stock ownership in a corpora-
tion that owns a building containing cooperative apartments. Stockholders
occupy apartments under a lease.
21. Business organizations may receive, hold, and convey title to real property.
22. Less-than-freehold estates also are called leasehold estates and are estates of
limited duration, providing possession and control but not title (as in the
case of freehold estates).
23. The leasehold estates are estate for years, estate from year to year, estate at
will, and estate at sufferance.
24. Encumbrances are things that diminish the bundle of rights. They may take
the form of a claim, lien, charge, or liability attached to and binding upon
real property. Examples are encroachments, liens, restrictive (protective)
covenants, easements, marital life estates, and deed restrictions. A lien is a
claim or charge against property that may result in the loss of title through
foreclosure. Restrictive covenants, lis pendens, easements, and encroach-
ments also encumber, or diminish, the full interest in title.
25. An appurtenance is a right or privilege that results from ownership of a par-
ticular property and transfers with the title. An appurtenance depends on a
principal item or the real estate. It belongs to that to which it is attached. It
cannot stand alone.
26. A fee simple absolute title is freely transferable by the owner because he has
the highest rights in the property, but the title may not always be free of
encumbrances. Fee simple titles often have encumbrances, which pass with
the title. To be effective, however, such encumbrances need to be recorded
where they are easily discoverable (with certain exceptions, such as the
potential for a mechanic’s lien).
27. A freehold and a nonfreehold estate can exist at the same time in a rental
property. The landlord retains the title (freehold) but has handed over the
right of possession (nonfreehold) for a period of time.
© OnCourse Learning.
54 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Review Questions
Answers to the review questions are in the Answer Key at the back of the book.
1. Personal property attached to real property
is prevented from becoming real property by
which of the following?
A. value
B. an appurtenance
C. security agreement and financing
statement
D. mineral rights
2. Which of the following is a right in the
property of another that results from
ownership in a particular parcel of real
estate?
A. easement in gross
B. appurtenant easement
C. license
D. condemnation
28. Riparian rights are the rights of property owners adjoining a watercourse,
such as a river. Such owners have the right to draw reasonable amounts of
water from and enjoy access to the watercourse.
Boundary lines of property bordering water include the following:
a. Navigable waterway: Adjacent landowners own to banks.
b. Nonnavigable waterway:
1. One owner owning all the land surrounding water also owns the land
under water.
2. If more than one owner owns surrounding land, each owns land to
center of water.
c. Oceans or lakes where water levels fluctuate: Adjacent owners own to
mean high watermark.
d. State-owned land under navigable waterway and the foreshore (land
between high and low watermarks) of oceans and lakes.
29. A manufactured home can be considered either personal or real property
depending on whether the appropriate paperwork has been filed.
30. To be considered real property, the manufactured homeowner must remove
the wheels, axles, and towing hitch and also file an affidavit attesting to such.
31. Manufactured housing is built according to HUD standards.
32. Modular construction is built according to “stick-built” state building codes.
33. Modular construction is considered to be real property as soon as erected
on the foundation.
34. The most important elements of time-share rules are given in the Key Time-
Share Facts for North Carolina list on page 40 (the list is not repeated in its
entirety because of length and number of points).
© OnCourse Learning.
55Review Questions
3. Which of the following is (are) correct?
A. An easement provides a nonpossessory
interest in land.
B. The land on which an easement exists is
the dominant tenement.
C. The land that benefits from an easement is
the servient tenement.
D. All of the above
4. Easements may be created in all of the
following ways EXCEPT:
A. condemnation.
B. dedication.
C. prescription.
D. assessment.
5. An easement is terminated:
A. when the purpose for which the easement
was created ceases to exist.
B. when the adjoining dominant and servi-
ent tenements are combined into one tract
of land.
C. by abandonment of the easement by the
dominant owner.
D. all of the above.
6. If a property owner gives a specific person
permission to cross his property, this
is a(n):
A. easement in gross.
B. easement appurtenant.
C. lease.
D. encroachment.
7. The creation of an easement by
condemnation results from the exercise of
which of the following?
A. prescription
B. eminent domain
C. dedication
D. implication
8. A fee simple determinable:
A. is an example of a nonfreehold estate.
B. typically stipulates the conveyance is “as
long as” it is used for a particular purpose.
C. is an example of pur autre vie (for the life
of another).
D. is an example of freehold rights until the
original owner’s rights are determined to
be invalid.
9. If a widow inherits an estate by will granting
her the right of use and possession of a parcel
of land for the rest of her life, with the provision
that the estate will go to her children in fee
simple upon her death, she has received:
A. an inheritable freehold estate.
B. a life estate with remainder.
C. a life estate pur autre vie.
D. none of the above.
10. The highest and best form of estate in real
property is which of the following?
A. appurtenant easement
B. defeasible fee
C. life estate in reversion
D. fee simple absolute
11. Estate for years, estates from year to year,
estates at will, and estates by sufferance:
A. are leasehold estates
B. create a legal relationship between the
parties of landlord and tenant
C. are nonfreehold estates
D. all of the above
12. Title held in the name of a corporation with
many stockholders is considered to be held as:
A. severalty.
B. joint tenancy.
C. tenancy in common.
D. tenancy by entireties.
© OnCourse Learning.
56 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
13. Which of the following types of ownership
requires unity of interest, title, time, and
possession?
A. cooperative
B. tenancy in common
C. joint tenancy
D. condominium
14. None of the following includes the right of
survivorship in North Carolina EXCEPT:
A. tenancy in common.
B. tenancy by the entirety.
C. life estate.
D. joint tenancy.
15. The purchaser of a condominium unit
receives title to the land on which the
condominium is situated as a:
A. tenant by the entirety.
B. tenant in common.
C. joint tenant.
D. tenant at sufferance.
16. The purchaser of a condominium time-share:
A. takes title for a specified time period (or
periods) each calendar year.
B. may not convey title to anyone else.
C. has a 30-day right to rescind the purchase
contract.
D. all of the above.
17. In the cooperative form of ownership:
A. the owner owns his unit in severalty.
B. each owner owns an interest in the com-
mon areas.
C. the owners own the building as tenants in
common.
D. none of the above.
18. A tenant in common:
A. may sell her interest in the property.
B. may pledge the entire property as security
for a mortgaged loan.
C. may not bring legal action to partition the
property.
D. has the right of survivorship in the
property.
19. Ownership as tenants by the entirety includes
which of the following?
A. the right of one owner to convey title to
his share of ownership without the partici-
pation of the other owner
B. the right of survivorship
C. ownership of an unequal interest in the
property with another
D. conversion to ownership as joint tenants if
the owners are divorced
20. An encumbrance always:
A. has a positive effect on property value.
B. has a negative effect on property value.
C. is a lien.
D. none of the above.
21. All of the following are examples of specific
liens EXCEPT:
A. income tax liens.
B. mortgage liens.
C. mechanic’s liens.
D. real property tax liens.
22. Which of the following statements regarding
judgment liens is correct?
A. Judgment liens will not attach to property
to which title is held by a husband and
wife as tenants by the entirety unless both
participated in the creation of the debt
and are both named as defendants in the
judgment.
B. Judgment liens have a priority over the
real property tax assessment.
C. Judgment liens have a priority over all
liens other than property tax liens.
D. None of the above.
© OnCourse Learning.
57Review Questions
23. Liens, easements, encroachments, and
restrictive covenants are examples of which
of the following?
A. emblements
B. estovers
C. estates
D. encumbrances
24. Which of the following is an estate that
automatically renews itself for consecutive
periods?
A. estate at will
B. life estate
C. estate from year to year
D. estate for years
25. New construction time-share properties in
North Carolina require:
A. the developer to have a real estate license
before sales are made.
B. project registration with the Commission
before marketing the units for sale.
C. all time-share salespersons must have a
time-share license in NC.
D. the purchaser to be given a right of rescis-
sion for 3 days from purchase.
26. Time-share property in North Carolina:
A. must be for a residential use.
B. is considered personal property.
C. is the right to occupy a property during
five or more separated time periods over
five or more years.
D. allows a bona-fide employee of the devel-
oper to sell the units without a real estate
license.
27. An example of an appurtenant easement
would be:
A. city water and sewer easement.
B. easement for a neighbor friend to cross a
nearby property to access the beach.
C. an easement for the adjoining property to
have a driveway over the subject property.
D. a railroad right-of-way easement.
28. All of the following involve ownership of real
property EXCEPT:
A. cooperatives.
B. condominiums.
C. townhouses.
D. time-shares.
29. All of the following are real property EXCEPT:
A. standing timber.
B. underground minerals.
C. readily movable items.
D. naturally growing vegetation.
30. The item(s) included as real estate is (are):
A. trees.
B. fences.
C. a built-in microwave.
D. all of the above.
31. A manufactured home that is towed to
the land and placed upon a permanent
foundation but still has the wheels, axles, and
towing hitch attached will be considered:
A. personal property.
B. real property.
C. an improvement.
D. a fixture.
© OnCourse Learning.
3
CHAPTER
PROPERTY TAXATION AND
ASSESSMENT
KEY TERMS
ad valorem
appraisal
assessed value
assessment
market value
mill rate
mills
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
At the conclusion of this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe real property taxation and special assessment systems in North Carolina.
2. Describe the mill rate system used in the majority of other states.
IN THIS CHAPTER
The taxation on real property is the major source of revenue for the local units of government,
including both the county and the city or township. Taxes are imposed on real property ad valorem,
that is, according to value. North Carolina’s statute, known as the Machinery Act, sets forth the details
of property taxation. A key point of the act is that it requires the assessed value, or the value placed upon
property for purposes of taxation, to be set at true market value, or market value, a 100% assessment, at
least once every eight years. This reappraisal of property every eight years is called an octennial reap-
praisal. A horizontal adjustment upward or downward may be made at the four-year interval between
the eight-year adjustments.
An official called a tax assessor is responsible for the valuation of property for tax purposes.
Property values must be reasonably uniform to provide equal taxation of property owners. Many prop-
erty owners take advantage of an appeal process when they believe their property has been overvalued.
As a practical matter, a real estate agent can expect numerous phone calls from past clients asking
58
© OnCourse Learning.
59Tax Rate and Calculations
for information to support a value of their property that is less than the new
assessment if they believe that assessment is higher than the actual market value.
Often all they need is information on the selling prices of similar homes in their
neighborhood. If they need an appraisal, the agent should refer them to a licensed
appraiser.
Students will need to be prepared for questions regarding the mill rate method
of tax computation and for other rules regarding assessment rates that commonly
are used in other states. Such information is included in the sections Tax Rate and
Calculations and Appraisal and Assessment.
TAX RATE AND CALCULATIONS
Each local government sets a tax rate annually to meet the needs of its budget.
It does this by dividing the total assessed value of all the property subject to taxa-
tion by the amount of money needed for the budget. The rate is then applied to
the assessed value of the individual properties subject to taxation. The rate must
be sufficient to provide the revenue for the local government’s budget and may
be changed every year. North Carolina uses the formula of a tax rate per $100
of assessed valuation. Given the assessed value of the property and the current
tax rate, you can easily calculate the annual property taxes. For example, if the
assessed value is $185,500 and the tax rate is $1.50 per $100 of assessed value,
the annual tax is calculated as ($185,500 ÷ $100) × $1.50 = 1,855 units of $100 ×
$1.50 = $2,782.50.
Nationally, a more common form of tax calculation involves the mill rate. A
mill rate is a tax rate based upon one-tenth of one cent, or one mill. This equates
to one-thousandth of a dollar (i.e., 0.1 × 0.01 = 0.001 one mill). The tax rate is
typically stated in terms of “x” number of mills (i.e., 15 mills).
Test Tip!
Students need to be prepared for property tax problems using the “mill rate”
when taking the national portion of the state exam and using the “tax rate per
$100” in the state portion.
There are basically two easy ways to calculate taxes involving the mill rate:
1. Multiply the number of mills × 0.1 of 1 cent (i.e., 0.1 × 0.01 × number of
mills = mill rate as a decimal).
2. Divide the assessed value by $1,000 and then multiply by the mill rate.
“There are two zeros
in 100 and three zeros
in 1,000. Therefore, in
doing tax rate math
you can simply move
the decimal point two
places to the left for
problems using a tax
rate per $100 and
move the decimal
point three places to
the left for problems
using a tax rate per
$1000.”
—Steve Robinson
© OnCourse Learning.
60 CHAPTER 3 Property Taxation and Assessment
Example: What would be the tax bill for a property with an assessed value of
$185,500 that has a tax rate of 15 mills?
Answer: Solution is provided by illustrating both methods just addressed.
1. 1 × 0.01 × 15 = 0.015 (15 mills as a decimal)
2. $185,500 × 0.015 = $2,782.50 Tax Bill
OR
3. $185,500 ÷ $1,000 = 185.5 (# of $1,000)
4. 185.5 × 15 = $2,782.50
Students need to understand how to compute NC ad valorem property taxes.
Property Subject to Taxation
Generally, at some point, all real and personal property is subject to taxation in
North Carolina. Most people know of several exceptions to this generalization,
however, such as property owned by churches and nonprofit charities. According
to new tax laws, licensed personal property (such as automobiles) is now taxed
upon relicensing. The legislature also has exempted household goods from per-
sonal property taxation and eliminated the intangibles tax on funds in the bank.
Additionally, special cases exist for historic and certain types of agricultural prop-
erty and for the property of elderly and disabled people.
Listing Property for Taxation
All property subject to taxation must be listed with the local tax office. Real prop-
erty is listed in the county where the property is located; personal property is
listed in the county where the owner has her permanent residence, if this is dif-
ferent. The Machinery Act requires property to be listed during January, even
though the localities operate on a July 1 fiscal year. In certain circumstances in
which the taxing authority considers it necessary, it has a local option to extend
the listing period for another month.
Appraisal and Assessment
The distinction between appraisal and assessment often confuses people.
Appraisal is the process of determining a market value; it is discussed in detail
in Chapter 13. Assessment is the determination of a value of the property for
taxation purposes. As noted previously, real property in North Carolina must
be revalued, or reappraised, at least every eight years, at which time the assessed
value is set at 100% of the market value. As a practical matter, however, one would
not expect the two values to be identical at times other than this revaluation,
© OnCourse Learning.
61Tax Rate and Calculations
as the property usually appreciates in value over the course of the eight years.
As a result, the true market value, or simply market value, is historically higher
than the assessed value, although the economic conditions of the past few years
has certainly shown the assessed value can be much higher than the present mar-
ket value of a given property.
In many other states, it is quite common to see the implementation of an
assessed rate. The assessed rate is a percentage of the market value that is being
taxed. For example, if a state is taxing property at 75% of the market value, then
you would multiply 75% times whatever the market value is set to determine the
value for tax computation purposes (i.e., $160,000 market value × 75% = $120,000
assessed value). Typically, if the assessed value is reduced, the amount required to
be charged as the tax rate will be increased to collect the amount needed for taxes.
Timetable for Listing and Tax Collection
Real and personal property taxes attach to the property on January 1 when the
property is due for listing. The property owner has until January 31 to list the
property. Property taxes are due September 1 and are paid in arrears. Penalties
are assessed at the beginning of January if taxes are not paid at that time. Many
property owners think the taxes are due January 1 of the year after they are billed
in September because they do not have to pay a penalty for late payment until
then. All real estate agents should be aware that this is not the case; the taxes are
due September 1.
Important Dates for North Carolina Property Taxation
January 1 = tax lien attaches to property
January 31 = taxable property listed
July 1 = annual tax rate must be set
September 1 = tax bill is due and payable
January 5 of next year = last day to pay tax bill without late penalty
Property Tax Lien
In North Carolina, unpaid property taxes legally constitute a valid lien against the
property as of the first day of the tax year (January 1) even though the tax bills will
not be sent out until after July 1 and are not due until September 1.
As noted in the discussion of liens, the real property tax lien takes the first
priority. As such, it is an exception to North Carolina’s pure race system because,
in essence, the tax collector has already won the race to the courthouse, even
before the others start.
“Know the following tax
dates. Tax bills become
a lien in advance on
January 1st. Tax bills
generally go out in
July. The due date for
taxes is September 1st.
Taxes become delin-
quent January 1st of
the following year.”
—Len Elder, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
62 CHAPTER 3 Property Taxation and Assessment
Property taxes are lawfully considered a lien as of January 1 of the current
tax year even though tax bills are not due and payable until September 1.
Special Priority of the Tax Lien
Even though a lien is recorded against a property in one year, a subsequent
default in the payment of property taxes years later will take precedence over the
earlier recorded lien. As a practical matter, most creditors understand this situ-
ation and see to the payment of taxes so their lien priority is not disturbed. For
example, mortgage lenders prefer to collect monthly tax escrow payments from
the borrower so the lender has the funds to pay the taxes on time to protect the
mortgage lien.
Special Assessments
In addition to the ordinary property taxes that are collected by the local govern-
ment for normal operating expenses, taxes may be levied for special county, city,
or town projects (such as paving streets, building sidewalks, or installing sewer or
water lines) that benefit certain properties. The statutes allow a number of ways to
determine the amount of these assessments. A common way is to base the assess-
ments on the number of feet a property has that borders on the improvement.
This is referred to as a “front foot” and is a linear measurement along the distance
of what is being “fronted” (e.g., road, waterway, railroad).
By County
Counties have the authority to establish special assessments for new utilities to
the area, such as a new water reservoir or sewage treatment facility, that benefit
all properties within the jurisdiction. The statutes specify a detailed process of
determining the cost of the project, publishing a notice of the intended assess-
ment, and setting a schedule for the payment of the tax by the individual property
owners.
By City and Town
Procedures also are established for cities and towns to levy and collect special
assessments that are similar to those established for the counties.
Special Assessment Liens
As a real property tax lien, the special assessment attaches to the land and enjoys
a high, although unique, priority. This lien is behind the real and personal prop-
erty tax liens, but it takes priority over other liens.
“Late fees for real
estate taxes in NC
are called ‘Late Listing
Fees.’ They are pay-
able and due from the
seller and are not tax
deductible.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
63Summary of Important Points
Math Concepts for this Chapter
• Calculation of ad valorem property taxes given the tax rate and
assessed value.
• Students should be able to perform calculations by using BOTH the North
Carolina rate of “per $100” or the mill rate (National Exam section).
Tax Calculations Using North Carolina Tax Rate
1. Kevin’s property has an assessed value of $178,500 and is being taxed at
the rate of $1.15 per $100. What would be the amount due for annual
taxes for this property?
2. Renee has a house located within the city limits that has an assessed value
of $145,000. The tax rate per $100 is $0.85 for the city and $0.50 for the
county. What are her annual taxes for this property?
Tax Calculations Using Mill Rate
3. Pam has a property that is assessed at $225,500 and is being taxed at the
rate of 15 mills. What are the annual taxes due for this property?
Solutions
1. $178,500 ÷ $100 = 1,785 number of $100 increments
$1.15 × 1,785 = $2,052.75 annual taxes due
2. $0.85 + $0.50 = $1.35 tax rate per $100 for city and county
$145,000 ÷ $100 = 1,450 number of $100 increments
$1.35 × 1,450 = $1,957.50 annual taxes due
3. $225,500 ÷ 1,000 = $225.50
$225.50 × 15 = $3,382.50 annual taxes due
Summary of Important Points
1. The Machinery Act established the rules for property taxation in North
Carolina.
2. The assessed rate for property in North Carolina is 100% of market value.
3. The assessed value is the value placed on property for purposes of taxation.
Historically, the assessed value will be less than the active market value.
4. Tax rates for North Carolina are per $100 of assessed value.
5. Students will be required to calculate property taxes by using both the North
Carolina system of “per $100” as well as the mill rate method.
6. Tax rates can be changed annually. Do not confuse this with the fact that tax
values are to be adjusted at least every eight years.
© OnCourse Learning.
64 CHAPTER 3 Property Taxation and Assessment
7. Tax values may be modified every four years by using a horizontal adjust-
ment. A horizontal adjustment is different than the eight-year reappraisal
in that a horizontal adjustment simply applies a set percentage increase
for all properties in the affected area. For example, if the county wishes to
implement a 20% horizontal adjustment, all properties in that area will be
increased in value by 20%. The eight-year reappraisal is more of a “door-to-
door” analysis of property value.
8. Property that is owned as of January 1 of each year is to be listed for tax
purposes no later than January 30.
9. Tax bills must be mailed out by September 1, at which time they are payable.
10. Taxes are to be paid by December 31. There will be interest penalties charged
if taxes are not paid by January 5 of the following year.
11. An assessment is the pro rata share of the cost of some improvement, such as
sidewalks, water and sewer lines, and street improvements.
12. Assessments typically are charged by the front foot.
13. A front foot is a linear measurement of the width of the property along the
side that is being improved.
14. The mill rate system is used for most states in the United States.
15. One mill is the equivalent of 0.1 of 0.01.
Review Questions
Answers to review questions are in the Answer Key at the back of the book.
1. The tax levy against real property to provide
the funds to pay all or part of the cost of an
improvement to the property is which of the
following?
A. mechanic’s lien
B. special assessment
C. general lien
D. judgment lien
2. Real property taxation in North Carolina:
A. requires listing the property by
December 30.
B. makes September 1 the due date
of the tax.
C. requires penalties for paying after
September 1.
D. none of the above.
3. How often may the North Carolina
property tax rate be changed?
A. every eight years
B. every four years
C. every two years
D. each year
4. The Jones’s home has an assessed value of
$100,000 in a locality where the tax rate
is $1.45 per $100. What is their monthly
payment for tax escrow?
A. $83
B. $100
C. $121
D. $1,450
© OnCourse Learning.
65Review Questions
5. The tax rate is calculated on every $100 of
the:
A. sales price.
B. appraised value.
C. listing price.
D. assessed value.
6. According to the Machinery Act in North
Carolina, all real property must be reassessed
for tax purposes at least:
A. every year.
B. every two years.
C. every four years.
D. every eight years.
7. Kim’s house is located within the city limits
and has a market value of $240,000. The local
tax office is assessing her property at 75% and
there are tax rates per $100 of $0.95 for the
city and $0.35 for the county. What are her
annual taxes for this property?
A. $1,710.00
B. $2,280.00
C. $2,340.00
D. $3,120.00
8. Carol’s property has an annual tax bill of
$1,495.00 and an assessed value $130,000.
What is her tax rate per $100? (rounded)
A. $11.50
B. $1.15
C. $0.87
D. $0.01
9. A municipality has total assessed value
of property located within its environs of
$18,057,000. They have recently adopted an
annual budget of $162,513. At what rate per
$100 must they tax the local properties in
order to meet this budget?
A. $0.90
B. $1.14
C. $9.00
D. $11.43
10. George’s property recently sold for $235,000
and has an assessed value of $215,000. If the
local tax rate is $1.40 per $100 how much
would the annual taxes for this property be?
A. $3,290
B. $3,150
C. $3,010
D. $250.83
11. A parcel of land is being taxed at a rate of 25
mills. Assuming that it has a market value of
$175,000 and is being assessed at 70%, what
would the annual tax liability be?
A. $4,900.00
B. $4,375.00
C. $3,062.50
D. $1,225.00
12. A parcel of property (not a corner lot) that
measures 95 feet wide by 175 feet deep is
being assessed $8.50 per front foot for water
and sewer lines that are being installed.
How much will the assessment be for this
particular property?
A. $2,295.00
B. $1,615.00
C. $1,487.50
D. $807.50
© OnCourse Learning.1
BASIC REAL ESTATE CONCEPTS
KEY TERMS
appurtenance
bill of sale
chattel
deed
hereditaments
highest and best use
immobility
improvements
indestructibility
land use controls
land
nonhomogeneity
personal property
personalty
real estate
real property
REALTOR®
realty
scarcity
situs
specific performance
tenements
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
At the conclusion of this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the characteristics of real estate, including classes of property, physical characteristics of
land, and economic characteristics of land.
2. Describe the concepts of land use and investment, including highest and best use, land use
controls, investment objectives, scope of the real estate business, and the real estate market.
IN THIS CHAPTER
This text is designed to help you master the fundamentals of real estate by introducing information
in a step-by-step format that requires no real estate background. This chapter provides an overview of
the entire real estate business. Each topic introduced in this chapter is discussed in more detail in the
following chapters.
You should use this chapter to become familiar with the format of the book, including objectives,
summary of important points, and questions. Each of these sections is designed to help you study the
CHAPTER
1
2 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
material efficiently to master this information. Finally, this text offers advice on
preparation for the North Carolina Real Estate Licensing Examination.
BASIC REAL ESTATE CONCEPTS
Real property has certain physical and economic characteristics that set it apart
from other marketable commodities. These characteristics are so interrelated that
they have a definite effect on one another and are sometimes difficult to separate
in a practical sense. This chapter discusses these characteristics and their effects
on real property value.
Basic Terminology and Definitions
Real estate, real property, realty, and land—These terms often are used inter-
changeably to describe the combination of land, improvements, and rights and
privileges. Title (ownership) is conveyed by deed.
Personal property, personalty, or chattel—Anything that is not considered to be
real property. Title is conveyed by bill of sale.
The first thing students will have to master in this course is the concept that
all property is either real or personal. The concept of real property is made up of
three components: land, improvements, and rights and privileges. (These compo-
nents are addressed in more detail in the forthcoming chapters, but the following
gives a brief introduction.)
Land—The surface of the earth with the boundaries extending downward to the
middle of the earth extended back upward to the highest heavens. Land consists
of three components: surface, subsurface, and airspace.
This concept shows us that much of what is considered “land” is, in fact, made
up of air. In common usage, the term “land” often is used in much the same way
as the terms real estate, real property, and realty.
Improvements—Anything used to better or “improve” the use of the land. These are
artificially attached items and are considered to be real property and not personal.
Appurtenance—Any right or privilege that is considered to run with the land.
Not all rights and privileges are considered to run with the land and may be
“personal” in nature. The concept of runs with the land is that the right or privi-
lege is an integral part of the property, much like structures or other improve-
ments, and are conveyed as a normal part of the deed transferring title to the real
property. For example, municipal water and sewer lines are an example of a right
or privilege the government has to place the pipes to provide utility service to the
property and likely others. When the title is conveyed to a subsequent owner, that
© OnCourse Learning.
3Basic Real Estate Concepts
right remains intact. The same would apply if a property owner has the right to
cross over adjoining property to access theirs. Most likely, this would be a perma-
nent right that would convey upon transfer.
Tenements—Ownership interest in anything immobile and is considered part of
the real property.
Hereditaments—Any rights capable of being inherited.
Economic Characteristics of Land
Scarcity
An important economic characteristic of real property (Figure 1.1) is its availabil-
ity or scarcity. Land is a commodity that has a fixed supply base. No additional
physical supply of land is being produced to keep pace with the ever-increasing
population. The problems created by an ever-increasing demand for the limited
supply of land, however, have been eased substantially by an increase in the eco-
nomic supply of land. This increase has come about as a result of the greater utili-
zation of the existing physical supply of land. Farmers are continuing to increase
the use of land in the agricultural area. Greater crop yields per acre are being
achieved as a result of scientific and technological advances. Today, the agricul-
tural industry is producing more cattle per acre and more bushels of crops per
acre than it did just a few years ago.
In urban areas, land is being utilized to a greater extent through high-
density development. Advances in science and technology result in the creation
of high-rise office buildings, apartment complexes, and multilevel shopping cent-
ers. Consequently, 1 acre of land serves many times the number of people who
could use the land in the absence of these improvements.
Modification by improvement is another factor that has increased the economic
supply of land. These modifications can include the construction of highways,
bridges, water reservoirs, purification plants, and public utilities. The improve-
ments and expansions of public air and land transportation systems also make
a significant contribution in this regard. These accomplishments in the fields of
1. Scarcity
2. Permanence of investment
3. Location
FIGURE 1.1 Economic characteristics of real property.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
© OnCourse Learning.
4 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
construction and transportation have converted land that had not been acces-
sible and useful in a practical sense into land that can now be used. A substantial
increase in the economic supply of land has resulted from these improvements to
the land (rather than improvements on the land).
Permanence of Investment
Because of the physical characteristics of immobility and indestructibility of
land, the investment of capital and labor to create improvements to the land and
improvements on the land is a long-term investment. It takes many years to recoup
the investment made to improve the value and quality of land. If a developer mis-
judges the demand for land-specific improvements or if economic conditions,
including real estate market conditions, change dramatically, the developer may
never recoup his full investment.
Location (Situs)
The location of land, or situs, is an extremely important economic (or more pre-
cisely, socioeconomic) characteristic of land, and it is the characteristic that has
the greatest effect on property value. The physical characteristic of immobility
dictates that the location of a parcel of land is permanent. Therefore, if the land
is located in an area where demand is high, the land will have a substantially
increasing value. Conversely, if the land is inaccessible from a practical stand-
point or is located in an area with little or no demand, its economic value will be
depressed.
Although the location of land cannot be changed, the value of the location
(and consequently, the value of the land) can be increased by improvements to
access and other modifications. Additionally, the value of the location can change
as the result of the changes in preferences of people. In the 1950s there was a
great flight from the urban centers to the suburbs. This resulted in property value
reductions in urban areas. This trend has moderated in recent years. People are
rediscovering the inner cities, rehabilitating older properties, and restoring lost
urban property values.
Physical Characteristics of Land
Immobility
An essential physical characteristic of land (Figure 1.2) is its immobility. That
land cannot be relocated from one place to another is an obvious feature of land as a
commodity and is the primary distinguishing feature between land and personal
property. The physical characteristic of immobility is the reason the economic
characteristic of location significantly affects land value, thus making the market
for land a strictly local market. This requires brokers and agents to have specific
© OnCourse Learning.
5Basic Real Estate Concepts
knowledge of their local real estate market to serve buyers and sellers in their
respective market areas.
Permanence (Indestructibility)
Another unique feature of land is its physical characteristic of indestructibility.
Land is a permanent commodity, and it cannot be destroyed. It may be altered sub-
stantially in its topography or other aspects of its appearance, but its geographic
coordinates remain. Land values can change positively or negatively as a result of
changing conditions in the surrounding area and are said to suffer from economic
obsolescence when such changes adversely affect the value of land. For example,
the construction of an interstate highway can radically affect land values. Do not
confuse economic obsolescence with physical depreciation, which is a loss in value
from deterioration of the improvements on the property itself (see Chapter 13).
The permanence or indestructibility of land makes it attractive as a long-term
investment, but an investor should be alert to changing conditions that can affect
the value of the investment.
Uniqueness (Nonhomogeneity)
An important feature of the land is that no two parcels are identical, in either a
physical or a legal sense. For example, two tracts of land are quite different from
two cars that come off an assembly line. Two cars may be nearly identical, and one
could be substituted for the other; this is clearly not the case with real estate. Even
two apparently identical adjoining parcels differ in aspects such as soil, drainage,
view, and vegetation, to name a few.
This uniqueness, or nonhomogeneity, of each parcel of land gives rise to the
concept of specific performance. If a seller contracts to sell her real property, the
law does not consider money a substitute for this duty. Thus, if a seller tried to
breach the contract and pay financial damages instead, the buyer could refuse to
accept the money and insist on taking title to the land as the only acceptable per-
formance of the contract. For example, one might sign a purchase agreement for
a home in a particular neighborhood because it was next to friends, family, or
schools. If the seller changed her mind and offered another, better home on the
other side of town, the buyer could hold the seller to specific performance of the
original contract for the unique advantages of that property.
1. Immobility
2. Permanence
3. Uniqueness
FIGURE 1.2 Physical characteristics of land.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
“Other textbook
resources list four
economic charac-
teristics of land:
scarcity, location,
improvements, and
permanence and three
physical character-
istics: immobility,
indestructibility, and
uniqueness.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
6 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
GENERAL CONCEPTS OF LAND USE AND INVESTMENT
The Highest and Best Use Concept
The concept of highest and best use is of extreme importance and considers all the
physical and economic factors affecting the land. The highest and best use of land
is that use that will provide the property owner the best possible return on an invest-
ment over a specified time period, resulting in the highest possible present value of
land. Present value is defined as the value at the time of the appraisal; therefore,
highest and best use can and does change with time. The use must be legal and
must comply with zoning ordinances, government regulations, legally enforce-
able private deed restrictions, and restrictive covenants. The highest and best use
of land is attained by the intelligent use of capital, labor, and other resources to
improve the land and its productivity.
The task of coordinating and combining capital, labor, and resources to create
an improvement is performed by an expert in real estate. The expert may be an
individual developer or may be a general partner in a limited partnership with
the other investors providing the capital as limited partners. The expert must
determine the use of the land that will provide the necessary income from the
land after labor and capital have been paid. For example, the expert will establish
the optimum size of a building to be constructed on a particular site. The space
should not be overimproved or underimproved. The building must not contain
more space than can be rented in the market, nor should it fail to provide the
space that the market demands. An overimprovement or an underimprovement
does not provide the optimum income to the land, and as a result, the land is not
put to its highest and best possible use.
A particular parcel of land has only one highest and best use at any particular
time. The loss of residual income to the land resulting from failure to employ the
land to its highest and best use causes the value of the property to diminish.
Public and Private Land Use Restrictions
Even though most land in the United States is privately owned, there is a vested
public interest in land because the type of property use affects surrounding prop-
erty owners and the general public. Because of this interest of the general public
and of other property owners, the use of land requires regulation for the benefit of
all. The need for land use controls has existed since the country’s founding. This is
especially true in areas of extremely dense population, where land uses radically
affect a great number of people.
Public land use controls exist in the form of city planning and zoning, state and
regional planning, building codes, suitability for occupancy requirements, and envi-
ronmental control laws. Additionally, there is substantial public control of land
use as a result of government ownership. Examples of government ownership
include public buildings, public parks, watersheds, streets, and highways.
© OnCourse Learning.
7General Concepts of Land Use and Investment
Regulation of land use in the private sector exists in the form of protective or
restrictive covenants established by developers, restrictions in individual deeds (pri-
vate deed restrictions) requiring the continuation of a specified land use or prohibit-
ing a specified land use, and use restrictions imposed on a lessee in a lease contract.
Real Estate Investment Objectives
Real estate investors come in many varieties, ranging from the individual who
buys one rundown property and fixes it up for resale or rental to the individuals
or corporations who buy large commercial complexes such as shopping centers
and factories.
The primary purpose of any investment is to produce income or profit, bal-
ancing the profit the investor desires against the risk he is willing to take. Real
estate offers the opportunity to make a profit in three ways: appreciation, positive
cash flow, and tax advantage.
Appreciation is the increase in market value during the time the investor holds
the property. If an investor buys a property for $100,000 and it increases 3% in
value annually, and he holds the property for 10 years, the property will have
appreciated to a value of $134,391.46.
A positive cash flow exists when the gross effective income produced by the
property exceeds the total of operating expenses. (See Chapter 13, “Real Property
Valuation,” for the discussion of gross effective income and expense.)
Tax advantages may result from appreciation or gains being taxed at a capital
gain rate lower than the investor’s marginal tax rate when the property is sold and
from deductions of property taxes, insurance, and other expenses during the time
the investor owns the property. Depreciation may provide an annual tax reduc-
tion, postponing the tax on the depreciated amount until the property is sold.
While appreciation, positive cash flow, and tax advantage are ways to make
money on real estate investments, leverage allows more money to be made on less
investment. For a simplified example, suppose an investor buys a $100,000 prop-
erty with an initial investment of $10,000 for down payment and closing costs.
The property appreciates $3,000 the first year, has a positive before-tax cash flow
of $50 a month, and produces a tax savings of $400 for the year. This $4,000 is
only 4% of $100,000, which is not a very good return on an investment. However,
it is 40% of $10,000, which is an excellent return on an investment.
Real estate, like any investment, has risks. The real estate’s market value can
decline, the property can deteriorate, or the area surrounding the property can
change, adversely affecting the property value. Rent or income may not meet
expectations. Plants or military installations nearby can close. An “oil glut” can
change to an “oil bust,” leaving an overabundance of office space, homes, and so
on. Environmental problems may adversely affect the property. If any of these
things occurs, the effect may be compounded by the real estate’s lack of liquidity.
The investor most likely cannot sell the property instantly for its full value.
© OnCourse Learning.
8 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
SCOPE OF THE REAL ESTATE BUSINESS
The real estate business is extensive in scope and is a complex industry. Usually,
when people think of the real estate business, they think only of residential bro-
kerage. This is just one of several specializations within the real estate business,
however. In fact, within the field of brokerage, there are several specializations,
including farm and land brokerage, residential property brokerage, and commercial
and investment property brokerage. In addition to brokerage, other specializations
in real estate include property management, appraising, financing, construction,
property development, real estate education, and government service.
Real estate transactions can be traced to early written records from biblical
times, but those transactions were between the seller and buyer directly, without
the participation of a real estate broker. The business of real estate brokerage is a
product of the twentieth century. In the early 1900s, states began enacting licens-
ing law legislation, and today all states in the nation require real estate brokers or
salespeople to be licensed. North Carolina adopted its Real Estate License Law
statute in 1957.
The establishment of the National Association of Real Estate Boards in
1908 was a major factor in the development of real estate brokerage. During the
1970s, the name of this trade group was changed to the National Association of
REALTORS® (NAR). The term REALTOR® is a registered trademark of NAR, and
it identifies licensees who are also members of the local, the state, and the national
association.
It is important to remember that all licensees are not REALTORS® and that
only the active members of these associations may use the term REALTOR® or
REALTOR ASSOCIATE®. One of the most important accomplishments of NAR
and its predecessor organization was the creation of a Code of Ethics in 1913.
This code has contributed significantly to the professional stature of real estate
brokerage. Strong parallels exist between licensing laws and this original Code
of Ethics.
Defining Broker and REALTOR®
The general public has a poor understanding of the distinction between a broker
and a REALTOR®.
The North Carolina Real Estate Commission issues real estate broker licenses
and regulates broker’s practices. The term REALTOR® designates a licensee (bro-
ker) who is also a member of the local association of REALTORS® at the city
or county level, a state association of REALTORS®, such as the North Carolina
Association of REALTORS® (NCAR), and NAR. The REALTOR® association is
in no way associated with or regulated by the Real Estate Commission, although
the two groups work together for the advancement of professionalism in the real
estate business.
© OnCourse Learning.
9Scope of the Real Estate Business
Not all licensees are REALTORS®. North Carolina has approximately 94,500
licensees, of whom only roughly about one-third are REALTORS®. In addition
to being answerable to the Real Estate Commission and to the civil and crimi-
nal courts for wrong-doing or failure of duty, the REALTOR® is also accountable
under the Code of Ethics to the local association of REALTORS®.
Other significant contributions of NAR include efforts that have resulted
in licensing laws being enacted in all states, legislative activity on the federal
level to prevent unnecessary and harmful legislation from diminishing rights
of private ownership in real property, and excellent programs of continu-
ing education for members and nonmembers through NAR and its affiliated
organizations.
Relocation is a growing part of the real estate business. A vast relocation
network exists. Many corporations offer transferring employees generous relo-
cation packages, including paying the closing costs for selling old homes and
purchasing new homes. Some corporations have in-house relocation depart-
ments to assist employees with every aspect of their move. Others contract with
third-party relocation companies to provide these services. Many corporations,
relocation companies, real estate brokerage firms, appraisers, attorneys, and
others who work with relocation belong to the Employees Relocation Coun-
cil, which provides networking, research, education, and so on, to its mem-
bers. In-depth coverage of relocation is beyond the scope of the text; however,
new agents are advised to become familiar with the wants, needs, and expecta-
tions of relocating individuals, families, and employers, as well as relocation
companies.
Real estate brokerage is the bringing together of buyers and sellers or land-
lords and tenants for the temporary or permanent transfer of an interest in real
property owned by others through purchase, sale, lease, or rental by a real estate
broker for compensation. In North Carolina, such brokerage activities require a
North Carolina broker’s license.
The fact that real estate represents a growing percentage of the wealth in the
United States illustrates the extremely broad scope and importance of the real
estate business. The complexity of this business requires that agents have con-
tinual interaction with people in a variety of other professions. Today’s real estate
practitioner needs a basic knowledge of the many functions performed by other
members of the real estate and allied professions.
Real estate professionals must work with mortgage bankers or brokers to
secure financing for their clients; appraisers to validate the value of the property;
home inspectors and wood-destroying insect inspectors to determine the condi-
tion of the property; developers and contractors when selling new construction;
attorneys, surveyors, and insurance agents when closing properties; and govern-
mental officials, such as tax assessors, environmental health specialists, and city
and county planners when necessary.
© OnCourse Learning.
10 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
Successful real estate practitioners are also counselors and educators who
must recognize the limits of their knowledge and guard against giving legal,
accounting, or tax advice.
The Real Estate Market
A free market is one in which the buyer and seller negotiate a purchase and sale
without undue pressure, urgency, or outside influence other than the principle of
supply and demand. Although government regulations may indirectly affect the
price of real estate or the costs of borrowing money to buy real estate, the govern-
ment does not set real estate prices. The principle of supply and demand deter-
mines real estate prices; thus, the real estate market is an excellent example of the
free market concept. Market value, which is discussed in Chapter 13, depends on
the free market concept.
Special Characteristics
The physical characteristics of land create special characteristics of the real estate
market that do not exist in other markets. As noted previously, the immobility of
real estate causes the market to be local in character, requiring local specialists
who are currently familiar with local market conditions, property values, and
availability. The nonhomogeneity, or uniqueness, of each parcel of real estate also
requires that the market be local. Each parcel of real estate is unique, primarily
because of its location.
The physical characteristic of immobility also results in a market that is slow
to react to changes in supply and demand. When supply substantially exceeds
demand, existing properties cannot be withdrawn from a local market area and
relocated to an area in which there is a higher demand. Conversely, when the
demand exceeds supply, new supplies of housing and business properties cannot
be constructed quickly. Therefore, after a recession, it takes many months for the
supply to equal or exceed demand in the real estate market.
Factors Affecting Supply and Demand
Several factors affect supply and demand in the real estate market, on both the
local and national levels. Examples of these factors include interest rates; avail-
ability of financing for purchase and construction; population migrations; varia-
tions in population trends and family formations; government regulations; local
and national economic conditions; and the availability and cost of building sites,
construction materials, and labor.
Historical Trends
Just as the economy as a whole is subject to peaks and valleys of activity that have
recurred over the years with fairly reasonable regularity, the real estate industry,
© OnCourse Learning.
11Scope of the Real Estate Business
as a part of this economy, is similarly subjected to recurring periods of recession
and prosperity.
The real estate industry is often the first industry to feel the adverse effects
of depressed conditions in the national and local economies. It may take the
real estate industry longer than the economy as a whole to climb out of a reces-
sion because of the inability of the real estate industry to react quickly to radical
changes in supply and demand. But that is not always the case. In recent times,
real estate has sometimes remained strong during a recession or led the recovery
from an economic downturn.
Another characteristic of the real estate cycle is that the real estate industry
usually attains a much higher level of activity in prosperous times than does the
economy in general.
The Real Estate Practitioner
North Carolina defines only one real estate license category, broker, since it
became an all-broker state on April 1, 2006, eliminating the “salesperson” license
category. All individuals or entities who want to engage in real estate broker-
age activities in North Carolina must first be licensed as brokers. Many current
brokers have received their licenses under previous criteria of either education
and experience (criterion one) and the passing of a state examination (criterion
two). Some have been licensed based on reciprocal licensing arrangements in
other states. Those who met the criteria for and were licensed as brokers before
April 1, 2006, can remain brokers with no provisional status attached to their
licenses. Those who were licensed as salespersons as of that date were licensed
automatically as brokers at that time, although with provisional status. All new
brokers licensed after April 1, 2006, were granted licenses on provisional sta-
tus. To remove provisional status, all provisional brokers must complete three
30-hour post-licensing courses and pass the course exams.
A broker without provisional status is able to practice independently. A broker
with attached provisional status is not. She must work under the supervision of a
broker who is a broker-in-charge (BIC) until she has completed all post-licensing
requirements to remove the provisional status and to practice independently. A
provisional broker cannot become a BIC. A BIC must have a minimum of two
years’ full-time real estate experience, which may be met as a broker regardless of
provisional status or lack thereof; however, provisional status must be removed
before becoming a BIC. Although the broker-in-charge is ultimately responsible
for all actions of the provisional brokers she supervises, the provisional broker
cannot escape responsibility for her duties and actions.
Relationships between brokers and clients/customers, as well as relation-
ships among brokers, are discussed extensively in Chapter 7. They are men-
tioned in this chapter only to clarify the terminology used in this text. The word
© OnCourse Learning.
12 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
broker or agent is used when the text is referring to a broker or a provisional
broker when differentiation between the two is not required. The terms broker
and provisional broker are used to differentiate the two categories of licensees,
when necessary.
The successful real estate practitioner is not engaged in applying techniques
of the “hard sell.” Rather, he is a counselor or an adviser working diligently to
solve the problems of buyers, sellers, and renters of real estate. Everyone who
contacts a real estate office has a problem. The problem involves real property—
the need to buy, sell, or lease. The real estate practitioner’s ability to solve these
problems for the benefit of others results in a successful career. Like any good
counselor, the real estate practitioner provides information to, but does not make
decisions for, the clients and customers. What information can and cannot be
provided depends on several factors, but especially on the law of agency, which is
discussed in Chapter 7.
A career in real estate can provide the practitioner with satisfaction from
serving the needs of people and with accompanying financial rewards. Success
in the real estate business is built on knowledge, service to others, and ethical
conduct in all dealings.
The real estate practitioner must be knowledgeable in a variety of other sub-
jects necessary to satisfactorily perform one’s obligations in real estate trans-
actions. These other subjects, which are discussed in depth in later chapters,
include property ownership and interests, transfer of title to real property, fun-
damentals of residential construction, valuation of real estate, land use controls,
fair housing laws, property management, insurance, and federal income tax
implications of real estate ownership and sale. The real estate practitioner also
must understand the meaning of the various real estate and legal terms used in
real estate transactions. Finally, the practitioner must have a basic understand-
ing of the various arithmetic problems that are common in the activities of real
estate brokerage.
Summary of Important Points
1. Real property includes the surface of the land, all improvements that are
attached to the property, everything beneath the surface, and the airspace
above the land.
2. Personal property (also called personalty or chattel) is the opposite of real
property—that is, everything that is not real property is considered per-
sonal property. Things that are readily movable—that is, not attached to the
land—are personal property.
3. Real property has the physical characteristics of immobility, permanence,
and uniqueness.
© OnCourse Learning.
13Summary of Important Points
4. Real property has unique economic characteristics based on its physical
location (situs).
5. The principle of highest and best use of land is an all-important concept in
land use. Failure to make the highest and best use of land results in a lower
value.
6. Controls of land use are necessary to protect the vested interests of the gen-
eral public as well as the interests of surrounding landowners. Land use
controls can be private, such as private deed restrictions and restrictive cov-
enants, or public, such as zoning ordinances.
7. The real estate business involves many specialties besides residential bro-
kerage and requires knowledge of many fields, including finance, housing
codes, government regulations, contract law, and appraisal.
8. A real estate market is local and is an example of the free market concept
wherein buyers and sellers have adequate time and information to reach
a purchase and sale agreement without undue pressure, and with factual
knowledge of all important aspects of the transaction. The physical and eco-
nomic characteristics of land create a market that is local and slow to react
to fluctuations in supply and demand.
9. The effects of depressed economic conditions are sometimes felt by the real
estate industry before other segments of the economy. Traditionally, the real
estate industry has been slower to pull out of depressed economic periods,
but typically it reaches higher peaks of activity and prosperity during pros-
perous times than many other segments of the economy. In recent times,
however, the real estate market has remained strong during a recession and
sometimes has led the recovery from an economic downturn.
10. The real estate agent acts as an advisor or problem solver for the benefit of
one’s clients and customers. Because the purchase of a home involves the
seller’s most important financial asset and creates long-term financial obli-
gations for the buyer, the agent must be thoroughly knowledgeable, compe-
tent, and responsible.
11. Real estate investment offers the opportunity to earn profits through
appreciation of the property value, tax advantages, and positive cash flow.
Leverage allows an investor to earn a greater return on a smaller initial
investment. Some of the risks involved in real estate investments are market
value declines, property deterioration, and adverse changes in the surround-
ing area.
© OnCourse Learning.
14 CHAPTER 1 Basic Real Estate Concepts
Review Questions
Answers to the review questions are in the Answer Key at the back of the book.
1. All of the following are separable ownerships
in land EXCEPT:
A. surface of the land.
B. area below the surface.
C. nonhomogeneity.
D. air rights.
2. The characteristic of land that causes the real
estate market to be essentially a local market
is the physical characteristic of:
A. indestructibility.
B. immobility.
C. availability.
D. natural features.
3. The nonhomogeneity of land:
A. is the basis for the legal remedy of specific
performance.
B. results from the uniqueness of every par-
cel of real estate.
C. is a physical characteristic of land.
D. all of the above.
4. An increase in the economic supply of land
has resulted from:
A. increased utilization of the physical supply
of land.
B. modification by improvements to the land.
C. high-density development.
D. all of the above.
5. The quality of the location of land and,
consequently, the value of the land can be
changed by:
A. the principle of nonhomogeneity.
B. relocation of the land.
C. changes in the national scope of the real
estate business.
D. improvements to the land that result in
accessibility not previously available.
6. The employment of the concept of highest
and best use:
A. includes consideration of the physical and
economic factors affecting land use.
B. results in the greatest present value of the
land.
C. must be a use feasible in the near future.
D. all of the above.
7. An example of public land use controls is:
A. restrictive covenants.
B. zoning laws.
C. deed restrictions.
D. protective covenants.
8. Real estate investment offers the opportunity
to produce a profit in the following ways
EXCEPT:
A. appreciation.
B. positive cash flow.
C. specific performance.
D. tax advantages.
9. The real estate market may be described in all
the following ways EXCEPT:
A. a free market.
B. a local market.
C. a movable market.
D. a market that is slow to react to changes in
supply and demand.
10. The function of a real estate agent in dealings
with buyers and sellers in the real estate
market may best be described as which of the
following?
A. financier
B. counselor or advisor
C. contractor
D. salesperson
© OnCourse Learning.
15Review Questions
11. The real estate agent must have specialized
knowledge of a variety of subjects that
include all of the following EXCEPT:
A. financing.
B. contracts.
C. legal advice.
D. valuation of property.
12. Economic characteristics of real property
include which of the following?
A. location
B. immobility
C. indestructibility
D. nonhomogeneity
13. Which of the following has the greatest effect
on real property value?
A. tax rates
B. location
C. availability
D. indestructibility
14. Which of the following is an example of the
private control of land use?
A. zoning
B. restrictive covenants
C. building codes
D. environmental controls
15. The term REALTOR® designates:
A. any real estate licensee.
B. a real estate licensee who is a member of
the national, state, and local association of
REALTORS®.
C. only licensees who hold broker’s licenses.
D. all of the above.
16. Physical characteristics of land include all of
the following EXCEPT:
A. location.
B. nonhomogeneity.
C. permanence.
D. immobility.
17. The National Association of REALTORS® is:
A. a government organization.
B. a trade group.
C. an organization for buyers and sellers of
commercial real estate.
D. all of the above.
18. Factors affecting supply and demand in real
estate include all of these items EXCEPT:
A. government regulations.
B. interest rates.
C. local economic conditions.
D. real estate investment trusts.
19. Scarcity and location are examples of:
A. physical characteristics of the land.
B. highest and best use.
C. permanence of investment.
D. economic characteristics of the land.
20. All of the following are public land use
restrictions EXCEPT:
A. building codes.
B. protective covenants.
C. zoning.
D. regional planning.
© OnCourse Learning.
KEY TERMS
air rights
alienation
appurtenance
appurtenant easement
bundle of rights
condemnation
condominium
cooperative
co-ownership
curtesy
declaration of restrictions
defeasible fee
dower
easement
easement in gross
emblements
eminent domain
encroachment
encumbrance
estate
estovers
fee simple absolute
fixture
foreshore
freehold estate
fruits of industry (fructus
industriales)
fruits of the soil
(fructus naturales)
hereditament
intestate succession
joint tenancy
judgment lien
land
lateral support
leasehold estates
levy
lien
life estate
life tenant
lis pendens
littoral rights
marital life estates
mineral lease
nonfreehold estate
North Carolina Condominium
Act
partition
party wall
prescription
profit or profit à prendre
pur autre vie
remainderman
reversionary interest
riparian rights
severalty
subjacent support
survivorship
tenancy by the entirety
tenancy in common
tenements
time sharing
townhouse
Uniform Commercial
Code (UCC)
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP
AND INTERESTS2
CHAPTER
16
© OnCourse Learning.
17The Concept of Property
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
At the conclusion of this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Define and give examples of real property and personal property.
2. Define and give examples of fixtures, as well as describe tests for determining whether an item
is a fixture.
3. Define and list the freehold estates.
4. Define severalty and concurrent property ownership, including condominiums, townhouses,
cooperatives, planned unit developments (PUDs), and time-share property.
5. List and define types of lien.
6. List and define types of easement.
7. Define encroachments and appurtenances such as water, air, and subsurface rights.
8. Describe real property taxation and special assessment systems in North Carolina.
IN THIS CHAPTER
This chapter begins the discussion of the various forms of real property ownership. Real
estate is defined by (and is subject to) a complex and unique body of laws. Although
you will be exploring a variety of legal terms, you should not give legal advice. Pro-
viding legal advice or opinions is defined as the practice of law, which only attorneys
are authorized to do. It is, however, the duty of real estate agents to recognize basic
concepts of law as they affect clients and customers and to see that they are properly
informed of their rights and obligations through appropriate legal counsel.
THE CONCEPT OF PROPERTY
Property is an individual’s, a group’s, or an entity’s ownership rights, interest, and
legal relationship to something, tangible or intangible, to the exclusion of other
individuals, groups, and entities. Property, therefore, may be considered a legally
created and protected bundle of rights, which an individual, a group, or an entity
has in a tangible item or an intangible concept. A bundle of rights includes the
right to possession of the property; the right of quiet enjoyment of the property; the
right to exclude others; the right to dispose of the property by gift, by sale, or by
will; and the right to control the use of the property and profits within the limits of
the law. The components of the bundle can belong to one owner or can be sepa-
rated with rights or groups of rights belonging to different owners. Examples of
separate ownership of various rights in the bundle abound. For example, Hertz,
a corporate entity, owns cars (tangible property) but rents the right to use those
cars (intangible property) to individuals; an owner of an office building leases
office space (right to possess and use) to a corporation; and a landowner sells the
mineral rights to his property while retaining all other rights. Note that owner-
ship and lease rights may coexist within the same property at the same time.
“When you purchase
a property, you get a
bundle of rights. The
items in the bundle
can be remembered by
the acronym DEEPC:
Disposition, Enjoy-
ment, Exclusivity, Pos-
session, and Control.”
—Terry Wilson, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
18 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Property is divided into real property and personal property. Real estate practi-
tioners must have a thorough understanding of the differences between real and
personal property. Different laws apply to each type of property. Most items of
personal property do not require written documentation of transfer of owner-
ship, but all transfers of ownership of an interest in real property must be in writ-
ing. Personal and real property are taxed differently. Owners’ and creditors’ rights
differ depending on whether the property is real or personal.
Real Property
In Chapter 1, real property, also called real estate and realty, was defined as land
and everything permanently attached to the land. A concept of the law of real
property is that real property consists of lands, tenements, and hereditaments;
therefore, everything included in the following definitions of these terms is a
component of the property owner’s bundle of rights.
Land is the surface of the earth; the area below the surface to the center of the
earth; and the area above the surface, theoretically, to the highest heavens.
Plants are either annuals or perennials. Annuals must be planted each
year and are considered personal property. Annuals are also called fructus
industriales.
Perennials do not require annual cultivation and are considered real
property unless planted in a moveable container. Perennials are also called
fructus naturales.
Land includes structures and other improvements (such as fences, swimming
pools, flagpoles, and retaining walls) that have been placed there with the inten-
tion that they be a permanent part of the land.
Tenements and Hereditaments
Tenements include all those things that are included in the definition of land and
include both corporeal and incorporeal rights in land. Corporeal rights are tangible
things—things that can be touched and seen. Incorporeal rights are things that
are intangible. Tenements include buildings (corporeal). Tenements also include
rights in the property of another, such as an easement (incorporeal). In addition,
tenements include intangible rights in the land of another, such as the right to take
minerals, soils, timber, fish, or game from that land. This right is called profit à
prendre, or simply profit.
Hereditament is a term that includes everything in the term land and everything in
the term tenements that is capable of being inherited. The land and buildings are
© OnCourse Learning.
19The Concept of Property
capable of being inherited and are therefore hereditaments. Some personal rights
in land, such as the right to fish and some easements, may not be inheritable. If
these rights are not inheritable, they are not hereditaments.
Things that grow in the soil may be included in the definition of real prop-
erty. Growing things that do not require planting or cultivation but that grow
naturally and are perennial are fruits of the soil (fructus naturales) and are desig-
nated in law as real property. Examples include forest trees, native shrubs, and
wild berries. Growing things that require planting and cultivation are fruits of
industry (fructus industriales) or emblements and are defined as personal prop-
erty. These are usually annual crops, and examples include corn, wheat, melons,
and soybeans. The term emblements also is used to denote the right of a tenant
to reenter the property and harvest the emblements after the termination of
the tenancy.
Appurtenances
An appurtenance is any right or privilege that is said to “run with the land.”
Therefore, it transfers with title to the land. Several of the items discussed next
are examples of common appurtenances, such as subsurface, air, and riparian
(water) rights. These three examples illustrate that an appurtenance cannot exist
by itself; that is, the easement must attach to the primary item, the land that it
affects. Other examples of appurtenances include appurtenant easements and the
benefits of restrictive (protective) covenants (discussed later in this chapter).
Subsurface Rights
A subsurface right, or mineral right, is an interest in real property that allows the
owner to take minerals from the earth. The owner may conduct mining opera-
tions or drilling operations personally or may sell or lease these rights to others
on a royalty basis. A mineral lease permits the use of land for mineral exploration
and mining operations. (The Statute of Frauds, discussed in Chapter 4, requires
that such a lease be in writing to be enforceable.) The lease may be for a definite
term or for a period as long as the land is productive. A mineral royalty is income
received from leases of mineral land.
Air Rights
Ownership of land includes ownership of and the rights to the area above the sur-
face of the earth (air rights). The right of ownership of the airspace enables the
landowner to use that space to construct improvements, to lease, or to sell to
others.
The right of ownership and control of the airspace is limited, however, by zon-
ing ordinances and federal laws. Zoning ordinances often restrict the height of
improvements constructed on the land, and federal laws permit the use of the
“Mineral, oil, gas and
subsurface leases must
be in writing in North
Carolina.”
—Melea Lemon, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
20 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
airspace by air traffic flying at an altitude specified by the government. As a prac-
tical matter, a property owner is entitled to claim only the area above his land that
he might reasonably be expected to use.
Water Rights
The appurtenant rights of an owner of property bordering a flowing body of water
are riparian rights. Riparian rights attach to the land but cannot exist by
themselves. Generally, property adjacent to a river or watercourse affords the
landowner the right to access and use the water for purposes such as drawing
water for personal use and entering the water via a boat pier. Actual owner-
ship of the water depends on a number of factors. North Carolina recognizes
the distinction between a navigable and a nonnavigable watercourse. In the
former, adjacent owners are limited to the banks of the watercourse, whereas
the state owns the body of water and the right to use it. If one owner owns all
of the land surrounding a nonnavigable body of water, that owner owns all of
the land under the water. If more than one owner owns property surrounding
a nonnavigable body of water, ownership extends to the center of the water,
unless the deed states otherwise.
Littoral rights are the rights of landowners whose property borders an ocean or a
lake. If the water levels fluctuate, as with ocean tides, the landowner owns to the
mean high watermark. The state owns the foreshore, which is the land between the
mean high watermark and low watermark.
An owner’s riparian property and property rights can be affected by changes in
boundaries caused by the natural forces interacting with land and water. Although
the geographic coordinates of land do not change, the part of the surface covered
by the land and water can and do change over time.
The real estate practitioner should understand the following four natural pro-
cesses that affect riparian boundaries.
1. Accretion is a gradual process in which the boundary of riparian land is
extended by natural forces, usually water from a river, a lake, or an ocean
depositing soil, sand, or rock onto areas previously covered by water. This
acquired land becomes the property of the riparian property owner.
2. Reliction is also a gradual process and results from the permanent receding
of the water that leaves the ground under it dry and exposed. This acquired
land becomes the property of the riparian property owner.
3. Erosion, the reverse of accretion, is a natural process in which the flow or
movement of water gradually produces a loss of riparian land—for example,
beach erosion. The riparian property owner loses title to the land.
4. Avulsion, unlike accretion, reliction, and erosion, is not a gradual process.
It is a rapid or sudden change in riparian land, either loss or gain, result-
ing from violent natural forces. There is no legal boundary change for land
“When the river or
stream is navigable,
you own to the water’s
edge. When it is non-
navigable, you own to
the center of the river
or stream.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
21The Concept of Property
affected by avulsion. The owner can reclaim the lost land. Theoretically, an
owner retains title to and can reclaim land lost through avulsion; however,
environmental laws may limit or void his right to do so.
5. Doctrine of prior appropriation is based on the theory that the first person
to use the water has a continued right to do so and the later owners can make
reasonable use of what is left.
Lateral and Subjacent Support
Land previously was defined as the surface of the earth; the area below the sur-
face to the center of the earth; the air above the earth, theoretically, to the high-
est heavens; and everything permanently attached to the earth. For purposes of
understanding lateral and subjacent support, consider only the solid surface of
the earth. The ground is surrounded by more ground or by water. Riparian rights,
the rights of landowners whose property borders water, are well defined in law.
The solid surface of land can be gained or lost by forces of nature or by man’s
activity. What would happen if your neighbor decided to excavate the dirt from
her land bordering your property for a project elsewhere? Unless your land is
solid rock, the solid surface could shift, perhaps destroying or undermining the
support of improvements on your land. Your neighbor cannot remove the dirt
because you have a right of lateral support, which means the right of land to be
supported in its natural state by adjacent land.
Now consider the part of the land that is below the surface of the earth. Sup-
pose you sell the mineral rights. The owner of those subsurface rights can mine
beneath your surface, but she must support your surface rights from below. She
cannot cause the surface of your land to collapse. Subjacent support is the right to
have one’s land supported from below.
Personal Property
Personal property (also referred to as chattel or personalty) is anything that is
not real property; therefore, it is not land or anything permanently attached to
land. Unlike real property, it is readily, although not necessarily easily, movable.
Some personal property can be severed, or removed, from the property (such
as crops) and other property becomes a part of the real property by attaching
or annexation (such as planting trees obtained from a nursery). Once attached,
it becomes part of the real property unless excluded. Factory-built homes are
another example of personal property unless steps have been taken to perma-
nently affix it to the land including the requisite paperwork needed to convert it
to being considered real property. Its “bundle of rights” is not identical to that
of real property. Some property can be classified as real or personal property,
depending on circumstances. Ownership of personal property is conveyed by a
bill of sale.
© OnCourse Learning.
22 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Fixtures
Intent is the major determinant in deciding if an item is a fixture.
A fixture is an item of personal property that is attached to the land or a perma-
nent improvement on the land in such a manner that the law deems it to be part
of the real property to which it is attached. Fixtures cause many problems because
of misunderstandings by the parties involved. Real estate practitioners can avoid
problems by thoroughly understanding the criteria for a fixture and paying care-
ful attention to detail when listing and selling property.
Total circumstance test. This test, composed of four criteria or factors, may be
used to determine an item’s identification as a fixture in the absence of a contrac-
tual agreement by the parties.
1. Intention: Did the person making the attachment intend to make a perma-
nent improvement? Would it be evident to a reasonable, rational person that
the annexor’s intention was that the improvement be permanent? For exam-
ple, the owner of a property installs a ceiling fan in the family room. This
criterion should be used in conjunction with the other criteria. If the owner
expressly states her intention that the attachment is permanent, such as the
sales contract stating the item is considered a fixture, and all parties involved
are aware of the express intention, the express intention will rule without
regard to the other three criteria.
2. Relation of the attacher: An owner is presumed to make a permanent improve-
ment, whereas a renter may be presumed to make a temporary attachment.
However, the real estate agent should not presume anything about the
annexor’s ownership but should ask questions if a tenant is involved. If the
real property owner has permanently attached personal property to his real
property during his ownership, the attached property is usually considered
real property. (See the paragraph “Effect of the Uniform Commercial Code”
for an exception.) Once the item becomes real property, its ownership passes
to the new owner when the present owner sells or otherwise disposes of the
property, absent a contract or an agreement to the contrary. Take the exam-
ple regarding the ceiling fan. If a tenant instead of the owner of the property
were to install the fan, would his intention be that the ceiling fan remain
with the property or would he plan to take down the ceiling fan he had pur-
chased and replace it with the original fixture?
3. Method: Does the method of attachment mean that removal of the item will
damage the property? Answering this question is a bit tricky. What consti-
tutes damage? Is a small nail or screw hole damage? What is “permanently
attached”? It may not actually need to be attached. This criterion absolutely
© OnCourse Learning.
23The Concept of Property
must be used in conjunction with the other circumstances. A small picture
hanger on a wall likely does not constitute substantial or permanent attach-
ment, but a pair of thousand-pound statues sitting on custom-made concrete
pillars may.
4. Adaptation: How is the item being used? Is the item adapted to the real prop-
erty to which it is attached? An example would be blinds custom made to fit
nonstandard windows. The more “site specific” an item is the less obviously
attached it needs to be in order to be considered an attachment.
Courts have not been consistent in their application of the total circumstance
test. If the courts cannot agree, buyers, sellers, and real estate agents are unlikely
to always agree. Although real estate agents must understand these criteria, they
should not give legal advice as to what is or is not a fixture in a given circum-
stance. That would be practicing law without a license. They can avoid, how-
ever, most problems in this area by using and understanding the North Carolina
Bar Association/North Carolina Association of REALTORS® (NCBA/NCAR)
Standard Form No. 2-T, Offer to Purchase and Contract, found in Chapter 10,
page 276. Familiarizing the seller with this form at the time of listing and the
buyer at the initial buyer interview, or at least by the time of the offer, is an excel-
lent way to prevent misunderstandings.
Test Tip!
For an excellent list of fixtures that are important for testing purposes,
refer to paragraph 2 of the Offer to Purchase and Contract (Chapter 10,
Figure 10.2).
The practitioner must ensure that all parties understand all contracts. This can be
accomplished by clearly identifying fixtures and personal property in both the list-
ing and the sales contracts. Real property can become personal property by contract.
For example, a chandelier is personal property until it is installed in the house and
then becomes a fixture upon installation. If the contract provides for the chandelier
to be replaced with a less expensive one, the original chandelier again becomes per-
sonal property upon removal according to the contract, and the new, less expensive
chandelier, which is personal property when it is purchased, becomes real property
when it is installed according to the contract. If the contract were silent about the
chandelier, the buyers could reasonably expect the chandelier to be a fixture and to
convey as real property. In some instances, something is considered a fixture simply
because the contract states that it is a fixture even though the item does not appear
to meet the standards for a fixture listed previously, such as a stove. Simply stated, if
the contract says that an item is a fixture, then it is a fixture.
© OnCourse Learning.
24 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Trade fixtures. A special category of fixtures is recognized for the items of per-
sonal property that are used in the course of a business operating in a leased
property. For example, a merchant may rent a store and install shelves to display
merchandise. These shelves are a temporary attachment necessary for the opera-
tion of the business. A more complex situation would arise in the operation of
a restaurant in a rented space. Consider all the items required in this operation,
including stoves, ovens, grills, chairs, tables, and so on. Such attachments are rec-
ognized as trade fixtures, and they retain their personal property classification
such that the restaurant tenant can remove them at the termination of the lease.
The tenant remains liable for any damages caused by the removal of the trade
fixture at the expiration of the lease.
Again, the agent must ensure that all understandings of the parties are sup-
ported by terms of a rental contract. Recall, however, that only attorneys can draft
contracts. Real estate practitioners would exceed their authority and be entering
the prohibited practice of law if they attempted to write legal clauses in a contract.
Agricultural fixtures. Agricultural fixtures are those fixtures installed by a prop-
erty owner for the purposes of agricultural use. Although historically treated dif-
ferently, they are now treated the same as trade fixtures.
Effect of the Uniform Commercial Code. A special situation occurs when an
owner has financed the purchase of an item installed in her property. The Uni-
form Commercial Code provides for the lender to retain a security interest in a
chattel (personal property) until the lender is paid in full. An instrument called
a security agreement, which is put on the public record by the filing of a notice
called a financing statement, creates the security interest. This notice is filed in the
office of the Register of Deeds. The filing of the financing statement provides con-
structive notice to the world that a security interest exists in the item. As a result,
the attached item is not legally classified as a fixture, or a part of the real property,
until the security agreement has been satisfied by full payment. It is treated as
personal property of the homeowner until such time as it has been paid for in
full. Before that time it can be repossessed by the creditor to satisfy repayment.
Consequently, the lender can remove the item in the event the buyer/borrower
defaults in payment, even though the item has been attached to real property.
Subsequent purchasers, as well as a subsequent lender, are bound by the filing of
the financing statement. Therefore, a purchaser of the home or a lender accept-
ing the property as security for a mortgage must complete the payments or per-
mit the removal of the item by the lender in the event the property owner does
not satisfy the debt.
Improvements
Numerous improvements must be made to and on raw land to make it accessible
and suitable for the various uses people have for it. An improvement is anything
of value that is added to real property or anything that alters real property in
“At the end of a lease,
trade fixtures remaining
after the lease term
are considered aban-
doned by the tenant
and become the
real property of the
landlord through the
process of ‘accession.’”
—Tim Terry, DREI
“The application of
the UCC to fixtures
keeps these items as
personal property or
personalty until the
debt has been repaid.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
25The Concept of Property
such a way as to increase its utility or value; however, these improvements do
not include repairs and replacements. The definition has two parts: (1) private
improvements, usually done on the land by the property owner; and (2) public
improvements such as streets, sewers, water, and sidewalks done to the land by
government or quasi-government organizations. From a practical point of view,
the agent should make certain that all parties understand the meaning each party
intends to convey when using the terms improvements, improvements to the land,
improvements on the land, improved land, or improved lot.
Improvements on the land done by property owners include structures such as
buildings, paved driveways and walkways, tennis courts, fences, walls, and swim-
ming pools. They do not include routine maintenance, repairs, or replacements.
Improvements to the land done by government or quasi-government entities
may include the following:
1. Roads, highways, and bridges built to make the land accessible.
2. Utilities such as electric power, water, sewer, gas lines, and phone lines
brought to the site.
3. Modifications or improvements such as clearing, grading, and draining to
make it suitable for its intended use.
“Improved land” or “improved lot” could mean the land or lot has had improve-
ments to it to prepare it for a building, or it could mean that improvements such
as buildings have already been constructed on it. The important thing is for the
agent to make certain that the meaning is clear when listing, advertising, and
negotiating offers to purchase and in all other aspects of the transaction.
Test Tip!
For the National Exam section, the student should treat an improvement as
an appurtance.
Factory-Built (Manufactured) Housing
Just like many components of a house today that are manufactured in a factory
so is the case for entire homes. Although historically these type homes have been
viewed as “less desirable” than a stick-built home, the reality is that manufactur-
ing tolerances and conditions are superior to that of many site-built structures.
The absence of weather-related delays, reduced theft, and the ability to literally
work around the clock make this type of construction attractive in many ways.
The reference to a “manufactured” home is a modern term for what many peo-
ple traditionally have called a mobile home or house trailer. Today’s manufactured
home is built according to rigid U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop-
ment (HUD) standards and will have a HUD certification label affixed to the exte-
rior of the structure. This type of housing can be considered either personal or real
property depending on the steps taken by the owner. Initially the manufactured
© OnCourse Learning.
26 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
home is considered personal property and will be titled with the North
Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) much the same as an automobile
is registered. One of the characteristics of the manufactured home is that it will be
constructed on a permanent nonremovable steel chassis, although brokers need
to be aware that some modular homes may utilize a steel chassis as well.
The owner can convert a manufactured home to real property status by remov-
ing the wheels, axle, and moving hitch and affixing the structure to a permanent
foundation owned by the homeowner. Once this work has been completed, the
owner can file an affidavit of conversion that cancels the title with the DMV, which
will finalize the conversion from personal to real property. Once this is done, the
owner will need to change the tax listing to show the unit is now real property
and the bill of sale and lien will need to be changed to a deed and deed of trust as
applicable. Unlike many other situations involving attaching personal property so
that it may be considered real property, the manufactured home does not auto-
matically convey to real property merely upon attachment. Until the appropriate
paperwork has been completed and filed, the unit will remain personal property.
Many people confuse modular housing as merely a type of manufactured hous-
ing. Although both examples are clearly built in a factory, the modular home is
built in accordance with state building codes and once constructed on the per-
manent foundation will be considered real property. These type of units also will
have an identifying label, including a serial number, that typically is affixed next
to the electrical panel, under the sink area, or on the back of the unit.
Most subdivision protective covenants that prohibit the construction of a man-
ufactured home will not affect the ability of the property owner to construct a
modular home on the lot.
ESTATES IN REAL PROPERTY
Definition of Estate
An estate in real property is an interest in the property sufficient to give the owner
of the estate the right to possession of the property. It is essential to understand
the difference between the right of possession and the right of use. The owner of
an estate in land has the right of possession of the land in addition to the right to
use it. An easement owner, in contrast, has the use of the land but not the right to
possess it; therefore, the easement is a nonpossessory interest in land. The Latin
translation for the word estate is “status.” This indicates the relationship in which
the estate owner stands with reference to rights in the property, and it establishes
the degree, quantity, nature, and extent of interest a person has in real property.
Types of Estate in Land
Estates in land are divided into two groups: estates of freehold and estates of less
than freehold (also called leasehold estates and nonfreehold estates). Two estates
© OnCourse Learning.
27Estates in Real Property
can exist simultaneously in land. The owner (lessor) of a property has a freehold
estate. If she leases the property, the tenant (lessee) has a leasehold estate. Each of
these two major divisions contains various groupings or subheadings.
Freehold Estates
Freehold is defined as an interest in land of at least a lifetime and therefore gener-
ally is identified with the concept of title or ownership. Freehold estates may be fee
simple estates or life estates (see Figure 2.1). Fee simple estates are inheritable;
most life estates are not.
Freehold estates are divided into two categories: estates of inheritance and
estates not of inheritance.
I. ESTATES OF INHERITANCE
Estates of inheritance last a lifetime and continue after the death of the title-
holder as they are passed on to one’s heirs.
A. Fee simple estates
1. Fee simple absolute. The estate of fee simple absolute provides the great-
est form of ownership available in real property.
This estate may be described as fee simple absolute, fee simple, or owner-
ship in fee. Ownership in fee simple absolute provides certain legal rights
usually described as a bundle of rights. The owner in fee simple absolute
may convey a life estate to another, may pledge the property as security
for a mortgage debt, may convey a leasehold estate to another, may grant
FREEHOLD ESTATES
I. Inheritable
A. Fee simple estates
1. Absolute
2. Determinable
3. Conditional
B. Life estate pur autre
vie (inheritable during
measuring lifetime)
II. Not inheritable
A. Conventional life estate
B. Marital life estate
Note: Freehold estates
provide title.
NONFREEHOLD ESTATES
(LEASEHOLD ESTATES)
A. Estate for years
B. Estate from year to year
C. Estate at will
D. Estate at sufferance
Note: Provide possession and
control, but not title.
RIGHTS IN THE LAND
OF ANOTHER
A. Easements
B. Profits
Note: Provide a right, but not
title or possession.
FIGURE 2.1 Estates and rights in real estate property (in descending order of importance).
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
“‘Freehold’ means
that you are ‘free to
hold’ the property.
You are the owner of
it. A leasehold estate
is anything less than
ownership.”
—Jim Hriso
© OnCourse Learning.
28 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
an easement in the land to another, or may give a license to conduct some
activity on the property to another. Some of these rights may be removed
from the bundle, leaving the other rights intact. For example, if the owner
conveyed a lease or an easement to another, the owner’s remaining rights
would be a fee simple subject to the lease or easement. Fee simple owner-
ship should not be confused with the quality of title. Ownership in fee
means that the grantee owns it forever, not that it is free of title defects.
Certainly an owner cannot expect to live forever, so the ownership con-
sists of two periods of time, from receipt of title until the owner dies, and
the period of time after the owner dies. The owner has the rights of owner-
ship and use during his lifetime and then the ownership shall convey to his
heirs (either by will or by the law of descent.).
The word “fee” denotes ownership that is inheritable. Fee simple
absolute, also known as fee simple or fee, means ownership forever
or for at least a lifetime. Because the ownership is considered “for at
least a lifetime” the use of the term “fee” does not mean that owner-
ship is free and clear of any liens. It speaks more to the quantity of
title (at least a lifetime) than to the quality (free of liens).
2. Fee simple determinable. This defeasible fee or qualified fee estate is
also an inheritable freehold estate in the form of a fee simple estate;
however, the grantor can terminate the title under certain conditions.
An example of a fee simple determinable is a situation in which a gran-
tor conveys title to a college and in the conveyance stipulates that the
title is good “so long as” the property is used for scholastic purposes.
Title received by the college can be for an infinite period of time. If the
property is not used for the purpose specified in the conveyance, how-
ever, the title will automatically terminate and revert to the original
grantor or the grantor’s heirs.
3. Fee simple subject to a condition subsequent. The fee simple subject to
a condition subsequent can continue for an infinite period, as is the
case with the fee simple absolute. The fee simple subject to a condition
subsequent also can be defeated and, therefore, is a defeasible title. The
fee simple subject to a condition subsequent is created by the grantor
(the one conveying title), who restricts the future use of the property
in some way. For example, a grantor may convey property with the
condition that it can never be used as a landfill. As long as the prop-
erty is never used for this purpose, the title will continue indefinitely
in the name of the initial grantee or any subsequent grantee. Any use
of the property for a landfill will violate the covenant in the deed and
the original grantor or her heirs may reenter the property and take
“Fee simple defeasible,
sometimes known as
a fee with a condition
subsequent or a fee
simple determinable,
can be defeated and
taken away.”
—Terry Wilson, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
29Estates in Real Property
possession or go to court and sue to regain possession. By doing so,
the titleholder’s estate is terminated.
A grantor may want to convey a title this way for several reasons. In
the case of the landfill, the owner may be protecting the property he owns
that is close to the landfill. In the case of the college, the grantor may be
highly committed to education but may not want to give up ownership
of the property for any other reason. Notice that in the case of a fee sim-
ple determinable, the estate in the grantee automatically terminates in the
event the designated use of the property is not continued or a prohibited
use is undertaken. This is contrasted with the fee simple subject to a condi-
tion subsequent, in which the termination is not automatic. In the latter
case, the grantor and/or the heirs must either reenter the property or go to
court to obtain possession of the property and to terminate the estate in
the grantee. It should be noted that qualified fee or use conditions based
on race, color, sex, national origin, familial status, handicap, or religion are
void because they are against public policy; therefore, if a qualified fee or
use condition based on any of these factors appears as a condition of title,
the title is really a fee simple absolute.
B. Estates pur autre vie (for the life of another). These estates are measured by
the lifetime of a person other than the person receiving the title. They may
be willed or inherited by heirs of the life estate grantee if the grantee dies
before the person who is the measuring life. These rights should not be
confused with the more traditional, and noninheritable, conventional life
estates. The pur autre vie is an inheritable right, should the life interest per-
son die before the measuring life person deceases.
For example, Dad may grant title to his son for as long as Mom (his
widow) is still alive. If the son dies before Mom, the title to the life
estate pur autre vie would pass to the son’s heirs, such as a grandson
or a granddaughter. Therefore, the life estate is not only for the dura-
tion of the son’s life, but will last until Mom’s death, as hers is still the
measuring life. At Mom’s death, the life estate terminates.
II ESTATES NOT OF INHERITANCE
Estates not of inheritance are good only for the life of the tenant (free-
hold) and do not pass on to his heirs, but rather are disposed of by some
other method.
In addition to being created by an intentional conveyance, life estates
also can be created by operation of law. Life estates created by act of the
parties are called conventional life estates, whereas life estates created by
operation of law are called marital life estates.
A. Conventional life estates (estate for tenant’s own life). A life estate is a non-
inheritable freehold estate. It is created only for the life of the named life
© OnCourse Learning.
30 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
tenant; that is, one who holds a life estate. The question arises as to what will
happen to the estate at the death of the life tenant. If nothing else is specified
in the conveyance of the life estate, it will revert to the grantor or to his heirs
at the death of the life tenant. The grantor or his heirs thus would have a
reversionary interest in this case (see Figure 2.2). Alternatively, the convey-
ance of the life estate could specify that the estate pass on to someone other
than the grantor or his heirs. This person would be called a remainderman
and has a remainder, or future, interest in the property. After the death of
the life tenant, the remainderman would then have title in fee simple abso-
lute (see Figure 2.3).
B. Marital life estates. A marital life estate is created in North Carolina by
the intestate succession statutes governing the distribution of prop-
erty of one who dies intestate, that is, dies without leaving a valid
Testator/Grantor Grantee (life tenant)
Heirs
Upon grantee’s death, title reverts
to grantor or testator’s estate
when no remaindermen are named.
Escheat
(if no will and
no heirs)
FIGURE 2.2 Life estate in reversion.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
Grantor (in a deed)
or
Testator (in a will)
Grantee Remaindermen
Example:
Grandfather To son
for life
(life tenant)
Then to grandson
(remainderman)
in fee simple
To heirs if remainderman
predeceases life tenant
Escheat to the state
if no heirs
FIGURE 2.3 Life estate in remainder.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
“Do not memorize
that a remainderman
means a 3rd party. It
is better to remember
that any time a life
estate ends and the
reversionary interest
does not return to the
grantor then a remain-
der interest exists.”
—Len Elder, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
31Estates in Real Property
will. This statute allows the surviving spouse to choose a life estate in
one-third of the real property owned in severalty (sole ownership) by
the deceased spouse at any time during the marriage under certain
conditions. If the surviving spouse is entitled to any property of the
deceased spouse through a will or intestate succession statutes and
the surviving spouse has not joined in the transfer of such property
by signing the deed, the surviving spouse must forfeit any interest in
the deceased spouse’s property resulting from a will or an inheritance
to claim her marital estate. Few surviving spouses elect the marital
life estate option because it is seldom advantageous for them to do so.
Several important points pertain to marital life estates:
• A will cannot defeat the marital interest of a surviving spouse.
• Statutes do not apply to property owned as tenants by the entirety.
• A surviving spouse has a choice of either marital life estate or
property of the deceased spouse willed to the surviving spouse.
From these requirements, you can see that it is extremely important for both
husband and wife to join in the conveyance of any property owned by either of
them while they are married. Otherwise, the grantee’s title could be affected by a
marital interest of the surviving spouse.
Some states still provide dower and curtesy rights to a surviving spouse. Dower
is the wife’s right and curtesy is the husband’s right to a life estate in the property
owned by a deceased spouse during the marriage. North Carolina’s intestate suc-
cession statutes abolished dower and curtesy rights and provided a substitute,
which sets forth the manner in which the property of an intestate (one who has
died without leaving a valid will) is distributed to the heirs.
Rights and responsibilities of life tenants. A life tenant has the right of alienation.
That is, the life tenant can transfer her title to another person or pledge the title as security
for a debt. Of course, the individual cannot give a title for a duration longer than her
life or the life of the person named in the creation of a life estate to establish its dura-
tion. The life tenant also has the right to the net income produced by the property,
if any. The life tenant can legally mortgage the life estate. It is unlikely that a lend-
ing institution would accept a life estate as security for a mortgage, however, because
the estate terminates on the death of the life tenant. If the life tenant were able to do
this, however, she would be responsible for the principal and interest on that mortgage
note. An outstanding mortgage on the property is the responsibility of the grantor or
the remainderman, and the life tenant must pay the interest but not the principal.
A life tenant has certain responsibilities. He must not commit waste and
must preserve the estate for the benefit of the remainderman or for the person
who holds the reversionary interest. Otherwise, the life tenant is not answer-
able to the future holder of the estate. The life tenant has a legal right called
the right to estovers, which allows him to cut and use a reasonable amount of
© OnCourse Learning.
32 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
timber from the land to repair buildings or to use it for fuel, but does not allow
the tenant to cut and sell the timber for profit. A violation of the right of esto-
vers is called an act of waste.
A life tenant has an obligation to pay the real property taxes on the property
in which he has a life estate. The tenant also has the duty to pay any assessments
levied against the property by a county or municipality for improvements to the
property. Assessments are levied against land for improvements made to the land,
such as paving streets and laying water and sewer lines.
The life tenant also has a duty to make repairs to the improvements on the land.
He cannot permit the property to deteriorate because of lack of repairs and thus
cause depreciation to existing improvements.
Many states recognize the primary home as a sort of life estate that can pro-
vide some degree of protection from creditors. The North Carolina Home-
stead Exemption Law protects an amount of interest, or equity, in the debtor’s
personal residence, whether it is real or personal property, from creditors in
the event of lawsuits, including bankruptcy filings. The current amount of
protection is $35,000, which was increased from $18,500 in December 2009.
Additionally, this act increases the amount of protection to a maximum of
$60,000 in cases in which the resident is over the age of 65 and the property
was previously owned in tenancy by entireties, or in joint tenancy with rights
of survivorship, in which one of the former co-owners is now deceased. The
property owner is helped by this act in the event of judgment liens obtained
against her. The owner still would be obligated to pay property taxes and any
mortgage balances due.
Homestead exemptions in other states are relatively similar, although many are
more extensive than those in North Carolina.
Nonfreehold Estates
The nonfreehold estates, also known as less-than-freehold or leasehold estates,
confer a rental interest in real property. Four estates are recognized:
1. Estate for years is for any fixed period of time and automatically terminates
at the end of that period.
2. Estate from year to year is a periodic estate that automatically renews at the
end of its period if the parties do not provide otherwise.
3. An estate at will is for an indefinite time and may be terminated by either
party instantaneously by giving notice to the other party.
4. An estate at sufferance is not truly an estate but rather a holdover situa-
tion created when the tenant’s lease has expired and she fails to vacate the
premises.
These nonfreehold estates are described in more detail in Chapter 15.
© OnCourse Learning.
33Ownership of Real Property
OWNERSHIP OF REAL PROPERTY
Ownership in Severalty
When title to real property is held in the name of only one person or entity, it is called
ownership in severalty. Not to be confused with the word several, the concept of
severalty is actually a derivative from the word “sever.” The person holding title is
the sole or only owner. This is the form of ownership that a corporation likely would
have even though the corporation has many owners or stockholders (i.e., IBM Cor-
poration). The fact that title is held in severalty does not eliminate the possibility
of marital rights. This is the case when a single person acquires title to a property
in severalty and later gets married. Even though the new spouse does not have his
names on the title to the property, he still would obtain marital rights upon marriage.
Concurrent (Joint) Ownership
Simultaneous ownership of real property by two or more people is called concur-
rent ownership or co-ownership. There are various types of co-ownership, and
the rights of the owners depend on the type of ownership they have. The types of
co-ownership are tenancy in common, joint tenancy, and tenancy by the entirety.
The co-owners may hold title in the same manner as owners in severalty—for
example, fee simple absolute, fee simple subject to a condition subsequent, and
fee simple determinable.
Tenancy in Common
Tenancy in common is characterized by two or more persons holding title to a prop-
erty at the same time, with no right of survivorship. Anyone can hold title as a
tenant in common. The concept of unity of possession means that each owner
holds an undivided interest in the entire property, rather than one specific part of
it. Upon the death of a tenant in common, the deceased’s share goes to his heirs.
A tenant in common may sell his share to anybody without destroying the ten-
ancy relationship. Each tenant in common may also pledge her share of the prop-
erty as security for a loan. This creates an encumbrance against that share only,
not against the entire property. Tenants in common do not need to have the same
amount of interest in the property. For example, one tenant may hold a 50% inter-
est, with two other tenants holding 25% each. If the deed does not specify the
interest each holds, their interest will be considered equal.
A tenant in common may bring legal action to have the property partitioned
so each tenant has a specific portion of the property exclusively. If this can be done
fairly with a piece of land, each tenant receives title to a tract according to his
share of interest. If the land cannot be divided to the satisfaction of the co-owners,
the court may order its sale, with appropriate shares of the proceeds distributed
© OnCourse Learning.
34 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
to the tenants. Tenancy in common is also the form of concurrent ownership that
is recognized when either a joint tenancy, or tenancy by entireties, is destroyed
but when there are still multiple owners, such as the case when a married couple
obtains a divorce but remains in a co-ownership position.
Joint Tenancy
This form of co-ownership requires the four unities of time, title, interest,
and possession. People with joint tenancy must have the same interest in the
property, must receive their title at the same time from the same source, and
must have the same degree of undivided ownership and right to possession in
the property. For example, if there are three joint tenants, each must own an
undivided one-third interest in the property, they must all receive their title
from the same source at the same time, and they must continue to hold pos-
session concurrently.
If a joint tenant sells her share of ownership, the sale violates the requirement of
unity of time, title, interest, and possession as far as the new buyer is concerned.
Upon the sale of an interest by a joint tenant, the person buying this share does
not become a joint tenant with the other tenants, but rather joins them as a tenant
in common.
Other states, but not North Carolina, provide the concept of automatic rights of
survivorship in joint tenancies, wherein the surviving partners automatically take
over the share of a deceased partner. Today, the automatic right of survivorship is
not favored in law except in joint ownership by husband and wife as tenants by
the entirety.
As indicated in the previous paragraph, North Carolina tends not to rec-
ognize the automatic rights of survivorship, but rather requires the parties to
specifically indicate in the deed that it is to be joint tenancy with the rights
of survivorship. A common illustration might be “to Sam Smith and Tracy
Jones as joint tenants with rights of survivorship,” which shows a specific
intent. Examples such as “to Robert Bellamy and Sally Browne jointly” or to
“Angie Smith and Stephanie Clark as joint tenants” fail to expressly provide
for survivorship and therefore will not be recognized as joint tenancy but
rather tenancy in common. Additionally, in contrast to the more “national”
interpretation of joint tenancy, in 2009, North Carolina provided for the abil-
ity to have unequal ownership interests in joint tenancy as long as the right of
survivorship was clearly addressed.
The concept of joint tenancy, with rights of survivorship, is increasing in popu-
larity among unmarried couples, many of whom are not able to partake in tenancy
by entireties, as a means to acquire title and have the ownership automatically go
to the surviving member of the couple and therefore avoid the risks, costs, and
consequences of an inheritance.
“Joint Tenancy exists
where there are four
fundamental unities;
time, title, interest and
possession. Remember
TTIP.”
—Derrin Dunzweiler
© OnCourse Learning.
35Ownership of Real Property
Test Tip!
Joint tenancy ownership requires the following four unities:
• Time—Must acquire interests at the same time
• Title—Must acquire title on the same document (deed)
• Interest—Considered equal shares unless stated otherwise
• Possession—Has the right to use and possess the entire property
Tenancy by the Entirety
Ownership through tenancy by the entirety is limited to husband and wife. To
receive a title as tenants by the entirety, there must be a legal marriage at the time
that the husband and wife receive title to the property. It is not necessary for the
deed to read “to husband and wife as tenants by the entirety” to create a tenancy
by the entirety. The deed only needs to convey the property “to John A. Jones and
Mary A. Jones, who are husband and wife,” and a tenancy by the entirety is auto-
matically created. Tenancy by the entirety does contain the right of survivorship.
The surviving spouse receives title to the property automatically by operation
of law. Creation of tenancy by the entirety requires the five unities of time, title,
interest, possession, and marriage.
A husband or wife owning land as tenants by the entirety may not legally con-
vey property to a third party without the other spouse joining in the deed. There
can be no partition of real property held by tenants by the entirety.
Tenancy by the entirety exists as long as the tenants hold title to the property
and are legally married. Tenancy by the entirety is abolished by decree of divorce
or in the event of death of one of the owners. A mere legal separation is not suffi-
cient. When a final decree of absolute divorce is obtained, however, the ownership
is automatically changed to tenancy in common by operation of law, eliminating
the right of survivorship. In the event of death, the remaining spouse will now be
considered to hold title in severalty.
Married people may, if they elect to do so, own property as tenants in common.
It is not necessary for them to take title as tenants by the entirety.
In North Carolina, one spouse can purchase a property, but it usually takes the
signature of the husband and the wife to convey and give a clear title to a grantee,
regardless of how the property is held. If a mortgage or deed of trust is given
to secure a note for a property being purchased by one spouse, the lender usu-
ally requires the other spouse to sign the deed of trust or mortgage but does not
require the nonpurchasing spouse to sign the note unless that spouse’s income is
used to qualify for the loan.
Many times a property is owned by one spouse before the marriage. Upon mar-
riage, title will remain in severalty but coupled with a marital right. In another
“In North Carolina a
married individual can
take title in his or her
name alone without
the spouse having an
interest in the prop-
erty. The document
which waives and relin-
quishes the spouse’s
interest is called a Free
Trader Agreement.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
36 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
situation, a couple may have acquired title to a property together as co-owners,
such as tenancy in common or joint tenancy, before their marriage. As in the
illustration regarding severalty ownership just mentioned, the ownership does
not convert to tenancy by entireties upon marriage. The deed would have to
be conveyed by the couple, to the couple, after marriage to make it tenancy by
entireties.
Combination (Hybrid) Forms of Ownership
Condominiums
Condominium ownership is a form of ownership in real estate that is now recog-
nized in all states. North Carolina statutes define this type of ownership, set forth
the requirements for the creation of a condominium, and set special restrictions
on the offering of a condominium for sale.
A condominium purchaser receives a fee simple title to an apartment. Condo-
minium unit owners can hold ownership of their units in the same ways owners
of any freehold estate hold ownership—that is, in severalty, as tenants in com-
mon, as joint tenants, or as tenants by the entirety. Individuals, groups, and busi-
ness entities can hold ownership in condominium units in the same ways they
can hold ownership in other freehold estates, providing they meet the criteria for
the specific type of ownership. For example, only a married couple can own real
estate as tenants by the entirety. The owner can convey title by deed or leave it to
an heir by will. Condominium ownership includes ownership of the airspace of the
individual unit as well as co-ownership in the common areas of the condominium
along with the other unit owners. This co-ownership is as a tenant in common
in the common areas, including the corridors, grounds, parking areas, and rec-
reational facilities. The right to partition is waived in this tenancy in common
ownership of common areas (see Figure 2.4).
North Carolina statutes prescribe the manner in which a condominium is
to be created. This includes a declaration, bylaws, and a copy of the construc-
tion plans. To be valid, the declaration, articles, and bylaws must be recorded
on the public record in the Register of Deeds office in the county where the
property is located.
The declaration includes a legal description of the property; a plat of the prop-
erty with the location of the buildings, plans, and specifications for the build-
ings and the various units; a description of the common areas; and the degree
of ownership in the common areas available to each unit owner. It also includes
covenants, conditions, and restrictions affecting the property. It also may include
a “right of first refusal” clause, giving the association the first opportunity to pur-
chase a unit if the owner wishes to sell.
The articles of association establish an association to provide for the main-
tenance and management of the common areas and other services for the
© OnCourse Learning.
37Ownership of Real Property
owner-members. Owners, as members of the association, are assessed to pay for
these necessary services. Such assessments are usually in the form of monthly
dues, but periodic special assessments also can be levied. The bylaws set forth the
various officers in the association and the way they are elected, and they set forth
the requirements for amending the bylaws.
The creation of a condominium is not limited to residential purposes. Virtually
anything can utilize the condominium form of ownership. Other purposes may
include office space, parking space, and an industrial park. Indeed, it would seem
as the potential uses of a condominium form of ownership are limited only by the
developer’s imagination. The purpose of the condominium must be set forth in
the declaration as required by state statute.
Condominiums can also be one-story, attached, or detached units, but the indi-
vidual owner still owns only the airspace that constitutes his unit. It is not uncom-
mon that an owner may be granted exclusive use of some limited common areas
such as balconies, assigned parking spaces and storage units. All ground and
common areas are still owned as tenants in common.
A condominium unit can be mortgaged just as any other property. Federal
Housing Administration (FHA) financing has been available for condominiums
since 1961, and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) guarantees mortgage
LAND SURFACE
Owned as ten-
ants in common AREA BELOW SURFACE
Owned as tenants in common
AIR RIGHTS
Owned as tenants
in common
Building owned as
tenants in common
Units
exclusively
owned
Condominiums can also be one-story, attached, or detached units, but the individual owner
still owns only the airspace that constitutes his unit. All ground and common areas are still
owned as tenants in common.
FIGURE 2.4 Condominium ownership.
© OnCourse Learning.
38 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
loans for the purchase of condominiums. A condominium project must have
FHA or VA approval before FHA will make loans on any of the units. FHA fur-
ther requires that condominium projects have a specified percentage of owner-
occupancy before FHA will make a loan on any of the units. The occupancy rate
is monitored. That percentage can vary by region.
The North Carolina Condominium Act (1986) sets specific requirements on offer-
ing for sale or resale a condominium created on or after October 1, 1986, although
these rights can be waived, and typically are, when the condo is used for nonresiden-
tial purposes. Essentially, the act offers the following consumer protections (these
protections apply only to condominiums, not to townhouses or PUDs).
1. Public offering statement: The developer must provide a public offering state-
ment to the prospective buyer of a new condominium before the contract
is signed. The North Carolina Condominium Act requires that the devel-
oper disclose certain information pertaining to the condominium project,
including the purchaser’s right to cancel. The public offering statement is not
required for resale of units.
2. Purchaser’s right to cancel: A purchaser has the right to cancel, absolutely
and without penalty, the purchase of a new condominium unit from the
developer for any reason during the first seven days after signing the con-
tract. Title cannot pass during this seven-day period. Like the public offer-
ing statement, the purchaser’s right to cancel does not apply to resale units.
3. Escrow of deposit: Any deposits made by the purchaser must remain in the
developer’s or his agent’s escrow account the full seven days, unless the pur-
chaser cancels the contract earlier. In that case, the money is to be refunded
to the purchaser. All escrow accounts must be held in an insured bank or
savings and loan in North Carolina.
4. Resale certificates: When reselling a condominium built on or after October
1, 1986, the unit’s owner or owner’s agent must provide a resale certificate to
the purchasers that discloses monthly assessment for the common areas and
other fees for which unit owners are responsible. A public offering statement
or a right to cancel is not required for resale of a unit.
5. Warranties: There is an implied warranty that the unit is constructed in an
acceptable manner, free from defects, and suitable for the purpose intended
unless there is an agreement to the contrary or the warranty has been dis-
claimed in such a manner as to make it void.
The agent must provide his client with a public offering statement if the client
is purchasing a new condominium or a resale certificate if reselling a unit subject
to this statute. Failure to do so violates the agency relationship and, therefore, the
Real Estate License Law. It also leaves the agent potentially liable to the purchaser
in civil court.
© OnCourse Learning.
39Ownership of Real Property
Test Tip!
• New condominium sales require a public offering statement and contain
rescission dates.
• A resale condominium requires a property disclosure statement and a
resale certificate and does not contain rescission dates.
Townhouse Ownership
The townhouse form of ownership is somewhat different from the con-
dominium form in that the townhouse provides for the ownership of the unit
as well as the specific portion of land upon which the individual unit is located.
Because each unit rests on its own foundation and its own piece of land, it cannot
have another unit above it. A townhouse is, therefore, a vertical structure that is
attached horizontally to other units, which also rest on their own foundations.
The townhouse may be two or three stories, but all the stories are part of one unit.
This is in contrast to condominium units, which are attached vertically but whose
horizontal stacks of units share a foundation and ground.
There is another significant difference in the ownership of the common grounds.
Because the townhouse owner owns the land of his specific unit, the owners asso-
ciation owns the remainder of the common areas, such as the walks and swim-
ming pool, in severalty. This is different from condominium ownership, in which
the owners association owns nothing itself because the owners own the common
elements together as tenants in common. Maintenance is provided by periodic
fees and assessments that are charged to the individual unit owners.
Cooperatives
Ownership in a cooperative (co-op) results from ownership of shares of stock in a
corporation that owns a building containing cooperative apartments. The right of
stockholders to occupy an apartment is provided by a proprietary lease and there-
fore there is no deed. The only real property interest of the stockholders is a lease-
hold estate providing the right to possession of an apartment. The stockholders,
as lessees, pay no rent but do pay an assessment to cover the cost of maintaining
and operating the building, real property taxes, and debt service if there is a mort-
gage against the building. The owners’ rights and obligations are specified in the
lease and the stock certificate. Proprietary lease tenants do not “own” real prop-
erty. The cooperative ownership requires that prospective purchasers are voted
© OnCourse Learning.
40 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
on to determine whether they will be allowed to purchase the share of stock and
be allowed to occupy the unit. Because the purchaser is purchasing only shares of
stock, as opposed to actual ownership of real property, this is not in violation of
federal fair housing laws. Co-ops involving ownership of real property are not a
popular form of ownership in North Carolina but are a common form of owner-
ship in some larger metropolitan areas around the country.
Time Sharing
Time sharing is a fairly recent innovation. North Carolina has specific statutes
defining and regulating time-shares. Time sharing is defined as any right to occupy a
property for five or more separated time periods over a span of five or more years. Any
interest meeting this definition is classified as real property, and the laws pertain-
ing to real estate transactions apply. Article IV of the Real Estate License Law sets
specific regulations on the sale of time-share property. The developer must obtain
a registration certificate from the Real Estate Commission before offering the units
for sale to the public, and all people selling an interest in a time-share must have a
real estate license. Additionally, purchasers must be given a public offering state-
ment meeting North Carolina Real Estate Commission guidelines before a contract
is signed and must have a five-day right of rescission after executing such a con-
tract. See Appendix C for rules and regulations for time-shares and real estate laws.
Time sharing is a type of real estate innovation that allows participants to acquire
the right to occupy a unit of real estate, most likely a resort, for a brief period of
time. Because most people are unable to take more than a week to few weeks of
vacation time each year this has become a popular method for people who prefer to
pay only for the time they use. Unfortunately, this type of conveyance has created
many problems, including high-pressure sales tactics that have left many people
regretting the purchase almost immediately afterward. Numerous examples exist
in which conveyances were never recorded and liens were not paid off. As a result,
North Carolina has adopted numerous laws and rules pertaining to time-shares.
Test Tip!
Students should be aware that time-shares are tested in two different areas of
the exam. They may be tested on for Chapter 2 as well as under License Law.
Because of that importance, the following list gives the most important ele-
ments of these rules.
Key Time-Share Facts for North Carolina
• A time-share is considered to be five or more separate time periods spread
over a period of at least five years.
• All time-shares are considered real property.
“North Carolina Stat-
ute 93A-39-58 found
in Appendix C in the
textbook contains
significant detail on
timeshares that is on
the course syllabus.
Read this statute in
conjunction with the
material in the Adven-
ture Guide regarding
timeshares.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
41Ownership of Real Property
• All persons selling, or attempting to sell time-shares in North Carolina must
have a valid active real estate license.
• There is no separate time-share license.
• There is no exemption for employee of developer status.
• The developer must obtain a certificate of registration from the North Caro-
lina Real Estate Commission.
• The developer must record a time-share instrument (1) no less than 6 days
nor more than 45 days from date of purchase, and (2) no more than 180 days
from the date of sale if monies were paid to an independent escrow agent at
the end of the 10-day period.
• The developer must give the purchaser the public offering statement by the
date of purchase.
• The time-share contract is voidable without penalty for five days from con-
tract of sale.
• Monies collected on the time-share purchase must be deposited immedi-
ately within 10 days upon receipt.
• Such payments are considered to belong to the purchaser and not to the
developer during this period.
• If the developer, or his or her agent, fails to give the purchaser a copy of the
public offering statement by the date of purchase: the purchaser may obtain
from the developer an amount equal to 10% of the purchase price not to
exceed $3,000; and (2) the North Carolina Real Estate Commission can fine
the developer $500 for each violation. NOTE: Only the developer can be
fined and not the salesperson.
• Time-share projects must have a time-share registrar and no sales may be
made until such registrar has been designated.
• The developer also must designate a project broker.
• The project broker must supervise both brokers and provisional brokers li-
censees at the project location.
• Upon cancellation of the time-share contract, all refunds shall be made no
later than 30 days from the date of purchase (not cancellation).
Trusts
A trust is an arrangement whereby a person’s assets are being held by a third party
(trustee) for the benefit of that person (trustor). This trustee is quite often a bank,
attorney, or another person. This arrangement is considered to be a fiduciary rela-
tionship and often will involve real property. One of the distinct advantages of
such a trust is that it allows property to pass outside of probate as well as provides
privacy. In probate, the courts will want to verify the validity of the will, obtain an
inventory and value of any property, pay relevant debts, and then distribute any
© OnCourse Learning.
42 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
remaining assets to the appropriate parties, such as the heirs. Another advantage
of creating such a trust is that it allows much of this to be taken care of in advance,
thereby relieving the executor, or administrator, of estate of tasks with which they
may have little experience.
Living trusts often are referred to as “revocable trusts” and are created during
the lifetime of the person setting up the trust. These documents place assets into
a trust for a person’s benefit during their lifetime and then transfer the assets to a
designated beneficiary at death.
Testamentary trusts often involve the leaving of assets to children or others in
cases in which the distribution may be set to occur at a particular time, such as a
30th birthday, or when a specific event, such as graduation from college or mar-
riage, occurs. This type of trust often involves potentially large sums of money
that may not be acquired by the person setting up the trust until their death, such
as life insurance proceeds.
Land trusts are agreements in which the trustee agrees to hold ownership of real
property for the benefit of the trustor. One of the benefits of this type arrangement is
that it potentially provides privacy for the person who owns the property.
It is entirely possible that the recipient of a trust may be able to act only
through the actions of the trustee. It is not unheard of for a future recipient (ben-
eficiary) to represent to another person their desire to dispose of assets that are
not yet within the control of that recipient. For example a person wants to sell a
parcel of real property she “inherited” and is willing to sign the listing agreement.
In this situation, the broker will need to determine whether the beneficiary actu-
ally has the right to sell independently or if the trustee must be willing to allow
the conveyance.
ENCUMBRANCES TO REAL PROPERTY
An encumbrance is anything that diminishes the bundle of rights of real prop-
erty. As such, it is usually considered a burden on the property. Charges, claims,
restrictions, or infringements on a property reduce its overall value in some man-
ner. In some instances, however, an encumbrance has a positive effect on the
value of the property; one example might be a restrictive covenant, discussed
later in this chapter. Therefore, an encumbrance can affect value either positively
or negatively.
This section discusses liens, easements, and encroachments. Chapter 5 dis-
cusses other land use controls, such as zoning ordinances and deed restrictions.
Liens
A lien is a claim or a charge against the property that can result from a contrac-
tual agreement or from the operation of law. For example, a lien can result from
an owner’s contracting to have work done on property and not fulfilling part of
© OnCourse Learning.
43Encumbrances to Real Property
the contract, from the owner’s failure to pay taxes, or as a result of a lawsuit. A
lien creates a cloud on the title. If this claim is not satisfied in the required time,
the lien holder may execute the lien by process of foreclosure, which forces the
property to be sold at public auction. Proceeds of the foreclosure sale are applied
to outstanding liens in the order of priority of the liens, which is discussed later
in this chapter.
Liens fall into two groups, which are shown in Figure 2.5:
1. Specific liens are claims against a specific property, such as mortgages, prop-
erty taxes, and mechanic’s liens.
2. General liens are claims against a person or that person’s property, such as
judgment liens, personal property tax liens, income tax liens, and estate and
inheritance tax liens.
Specific Liens
Mortgage liens. A mortgage or deed of trust pledges a specific property,
such as a home, as security for a debt. If the borrower does not pay the debt
as promised (defaults), the lender can foreclose the mortgage by having the
property sold at public auction and applying the proceeds of the sale to the
debt.
Real property (ad valorem) tax and special assessment liens. The taxes levied by
a local government constitute a specific lien against the real estate. State laws pro-
vide that real property tax liens have priority over all other liens. An assessment is
a levy, or tax, against a property for payment of a share of the cost of improvements
made to areas adjoining the property. Examples of these improvements are paving
streets, installing sewer or water lines, and constructing sidewalks. Special assess-
ments constitute a specific lien against the property until paid. Ad valorem and
special tax liens are valid for 10 years.
1. Specific Liens: Claims against a particular property
a. Mortgage
b. Real property tax and special assessment
c. Mechanic’s
2. General Liens: Claims against all assets of a person
a. Judgment
b. Personal property tax
c. Income tax
d. Estate and inheritance tax
FIGURE 2.5 Classification of liens.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
“Liens are categorized
as specific and general.
Specific liens are
‘specific’ because they
are tied to a particular
individual property.”
—Len Elder, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
44 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Mechanic’s liens. In North Carolina, the term mechanic’s (materialman or
laborer) lien includes a lien filed by anyone (such as carpenters, lumber com-
panies, appraisers, and surveyors) who provides labor or material to a prop-
erty or property improvement. If these people are not paid according to the
terms of their contract, they can file a lien against the property to which they
provided work or materials any time up to 120 days after the last day that any
labor or material was furnished to the property. The mechanic’s lien is unique
in that when it is filed, it becomes effective as of the first day any labor or mate-
rial was furnished rather than on the day the lien is recorded. The mechanic’s
lien holder has up to 180 days after the last labor or materials were furnished
to take court action to enforce her lien, provided she filed the lien within the
120-day filing period. The Statute of Limitations sets the time limit for the fil-
ing of lawsuits in various situations. If a lawsuit is not filed within the statutory
time period, the injured party loses the right of legal remedy by operation of
law. Therefore, the mechanic’s lien must be filed within the statutory period. The
special treatment the mechanic’s lien receives as to effective date makes it neces-
sary to verify that all work done on a property within 120 days before closing has
been paid for. The mechanic’s lien is the one type of lien that may not show up
in a title search but, once subsequently recorded, would constitute a valid lien
on the property. To avoid the risks of mechanic’s liens being filed at a later date,
most lenders will require the seller to produce a lien waiver in which the parties,
who have produced labor or materials within the statutory period of time, have
signed a document stating that they will waive their rights to file a lien against
the property.
Legislation, effective April 1, 2013, applies to projects for which the antici-
pated cost exceeds $30,000 at the time of permitting. This law requires the
owner to designate a “lien agent” to whom the lien claimants will be required
to give notice. Anyone with a potential claim will be afforded a 15-day period
from beginning work or risk loss of the mechanic lien priority. This new law
does not apply to situations involving an existing single-family residence that
is owner occupied.
Commercial Real Estate Broker Lien
North Carolina enacted the Commercial Real Estate Broker Lien Act effective
October 1, 2011. This act enabled the commercial broker/firm to be able to file a
lien to protect their claim to a sales or leasing commission. This became neces-
sary because commercial brokers often have invested long periods of time and
large sums of money in a transaction that can result in large amounts of monies
due for the commission. As a result, commission disputes can arise that cannot
be resolved before the closing date. Further compounding the problem is the fact
that the broker generally had no right to place a lien on the property and had vir-
tually no “leverage” to force the owner to pay after the title was transferred. The
“Mechanic’s liens are
retroactive to the
FIRST day the con-
tractor, subcontrac-
tor, or supplier began
work or provided labor
or materials to the
property.”
—Steve Robinson
© OnCourse Learning.
45Encumbrances to Real Property
primary avenue available to the broker was to file a suit, which often resulted in
long periods of costly litigation.
As a result, this legislation was passed allowing the broker/firm to file a lien for
the earned commission in sales or lease transactions. This ability to file a lien is
limited to only the listing broker/firm who had the written agreement to sell or
lease the property as opposed to the cooperating broker/firm. The lien must be
filed before the title is transferred in a sale and can be filed up to 30 days before
the closing or by the date of possession in a lease. Once the lien has been filed, the
broker/firm has up to 18 months to file a suit to enforce the lien.
General Liens
Judgment liens. A judgment is a court decree establishing that one person is
indebted to another and specifying the amount of that indebtedness. A judgment
lien constitutes a general lien against all real and personal property the judgment
debtor owns in the county in which the judgment is recorded. The lien takes effect
from the time the judgment is recorded. A judgment creditor may record a judg-
ment in any county in the state, and it will constitute a general lien against all of
the judgment debtor’s property in that county. The creditor also may file notice of
the lien in other counties where the debtor may own property and be protected
for the debt in those counties as well. The judgment also creates a lien against any
property the judgment debtor acquires subsequent to the judgment during the
existence of the judgment.
A general lien does not apply to real property owned by husband and wife by
the entirety or as joint tenants if the judgment is against only one of them. For the
lien to attach to property in such cases, the judgment must be obtained against
husband and wife on a debt they both incurred. A judgment lien remains in effect
for 10 years in North Carolina unless the judgment is paid. Judgments may be
renewed and kept in force for an additional period if the creditor brings another
action on the original judgment before the original period has elapsed. Judgment
liens have a priority relationship based on the time of recording. The creditor who
records a lien before another creditor records a lien against the same judgment
debtor has a higher priority claim. The judgment debtor’s obligation to the credi-
tor who has priority must be satisfied before creditors with a lower priority. Judg-
ment liens are enforced by an order called an execution. This is an order signed
by the clerk of court that instructs the sheriff to sell the property of the judgment
debtor and apply the proceeds of the sale to the satisfaction of the judgment.
Personal property tax liens. Personal property taxes are assessed on certain per-
sonal property owned as of January 1 of the tax year. If these taxes are not paid,
they become a general lien against all of the property the individual owns. Like
the real property tax lien, this lien takes priority over other liens. The tax on
licensed motor vehicles no longer constitutes a lien on real property.
© OnCourse Learning.
46 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Federal tax liens. The U.S. IRS can create a general lien against all of a taxpayer’s
property for overdue federal taxes. This lien is created by obtaining a judgment
in a federal court against the taxpayer and by filing a certificate of lien against the
landowner in the office of the clerk of the superior court in the county in which
the taxpayer’s land is located. A federal tax lien does not have a special priority. Its
priority is established by time of recording, and its validity extends for 10 years.
The federal government imposes a tax on the estate of deceased persons, which
is called the federal estate tax. This tax creates a lien that attaches to all real and
personal property in the estate and continues until the tax is paid.
State tax liens. The NC Commissioner of Revenue can create a general lien against
all of a taxpayer’s property for overdue state taxes. This lien becomes effective
from the time of docketing in the superior court clerk’s office in the county where
the delinquent taxpayer’s property is located and remains effective for 10 years.
All states impose a state inheritance tax upon the inheritance of real and per-
sonal property. This tax is paid by the heirs to the estate and remains a lien on the
property until it is paid. The estate can sell property to satisfy the tax bill.
Priority of Liens
The priority of most liens in relation to other liens is based on the time (day and
hour) they were recorded. North Carolina practices this “pure race system.” This
system provides that liens are established in priority by the time they are recorded—
that is, the person who wins the race to the courthouse is at the head of the list.
When the proceeds from the foreclosure sale are distributed, the lien holder with
the highest priority gets paid first. With the exception of lien holders with special
priority, the first to record is the first to be paid. However, certain liens have special
priority by North Carolina statute, as is the case with mechanic’s liens, where lien
priority relates to the first day of work on the job rather than to the date of recorda-
tion. The highest priority of all liens is given to liens for real property taxes.
Homestead Exemption
North Carolina has a law that prevents the homeowner from total loss in the
event of bankruptcy. Homeowners may exempt up to $35,000 ($70,000 for mar-
ried couples filing jointly) of their home or any other real or personal property
protected by the NC homestead exemption. If the homeowner is 65 or older and
the spouse is deceased, the exemption protects up to $60,000 if the property was
owned as tenancy by entirety or as joint tenancy with rights of survivorship.
Writ of Attachment
North Carolina allows a type of pre-judgment right to creditors called a writ of
attachment. This right exists for creditors of debts, other than mortgages, and is
obtained as the result of a judgment being passed down in a court of law against
the debtor. By obtaining the writ of attachment, the creditor makes certain
the debtor’s property will be available to satisfy the debt once the judgment is
“If there is a foreclo-
sure the cost of the
sale is always paid first,
then real estate taxes,
then special assess-
ments, and then other
liens based on the
order of recordation,
except mechanic’s
liens which have a
priority based on when
the work was begun.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
47Encumbrances to Real Property
finalized. Upon obtaining the judgment, the sheriff will be instructed to sell the
property to satisfy the debt.
Restrictive (Protective) Covenants
Restrictive (protective) covenants are private restrictions that limit the way land
may be used. They attach to the land, and they pass with title to successive pur-
chasers. Often a developer defines such covenants to establish characteristics of a
new residential subdivision. They may limit construction to single-family homes
on a specific lot size, or they may require a given size or type of architecture.
Agents, and consumers alike, should be cautious that restrictive covenants in a
given subdivision can change within different areas of the development. The cov-
enants can address anything that is legal. Careful consideration should go into
establishing restrictive covenants because property becomes more difficult to sell
as the number of restrictions increases. The restrictions may be written in the indi-
vidual deed or recorded as a master instrument, a declaration of restrictions.
Lis Pendens
This notice of pending litigation indicates the existence of an unresolved lawsuit
that affects title to all or part of the property of the defendant. Recording of the lis
pendens (lawsuit pending) provides constructive, or effective, notice of the forth-
coming legal action and its possible outcome. As a result, if the property is trans-
ferred to a new owner after the notice of lis pendens is placed on the public record
in the county where the property is located, any court order or lien resulting from
the lawsuit will affect the new owner’s title to the property. Notices of lis pendens
are routinely filed in boundary dispute cases.
Easements
An easement is a nonpossessory right or interest in land owned by another. It pro-
vides a right of use in land and not a right of possession.
General Classification of Easements
Easements can exist for a variety of legal uses, such as right-of-way for ingress
and egress; a party wall; the right to take water from the land of another; the right
to receive air, light, or heat from above the land of another; the right to obtain
water from a well or spring on the land of another; and a right-of-way for the
purpose of putting utility lines under and above the surface of the land.
Appurtenant Easement
An appurtenance is something that has been added to something else and, as a
result, becomes an inherent part of that to which it has been added. In real prop-
erty law, an appurtenance is the right that one property owner has in the prop-
erty of another as a result of the first property owner’s ownership in a particular
© OnCourse Learning.
48 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
parcel of real estate. For example, if a purchaser receives a title to a tract of land
and included in this title is an easement in the form of a right-of-way across the
adjoining land of another, this easement is an appurtenance to that title. When-
ever the titleholder conveys that title to another, the conveyance includes the ease-
ment because the easement is appurtenant to the title. Because an appurtenant
easement moves with a title, it is said to run with the land. The land that is ben-
efited by the easement is described as the dominant tenement, dominant land, or
dominant estate, and the land encumbered by the easement (the land on which
the easement exists) is described as the servient tenement, servient land, or servi-
ent estate (see Figure 2.6).
Easements in Gross
Unlike appurtenant easements, easements in gross are not dependent upon own-
ership of an adjoining property. Easements in gross have no dominant tenement,
only a servient one. Typically, the owner of an easement in gross does not neces-
sarily own property in the area of the property in which the easement exists. The
owner of an easement in gross usually receives an easement by contract.
The most prevalent use of easements in gross is in the form of commercial ease-
ments. Commercial easements are common throughout the United States and
typically are held by utility companies for the purpose of installing power lines,
telephone lines, and gas lines above the surface of the earth, on the earth itself, or
underground. Railroad rights-of-way are another prominent example of a com-
mercial easement. These commercial easements are typically for long periods of
time, perhaps indefinitely, and are binding on future owners of the servient estate.
Commercial easements in gross are assignable and can be conveyed.
A
Servient estate
Easement appurtenant
Driveway
B
Dominant estate
FIGURE 2.6 An example of an appurtenant easement.
“There must be at
least two parcels for an
easement appurtenant
since they always ben-
efit an adjacent parcel.
Only one parcel is
technically required
for an easement in
gross since it benefits
a third party.”
—Steve Robinson
© OnCourse Learning.
49Encumbrances to Real Property
Personal easements in gross are a form of personal, nonassignable, and unin-
heritable rights to use a property for a particular purpose or for the duration
of the recipient’s life unless stated otherwise. Many personal easements are not
recorded and therefore are not enforceable against the grantor. If recorded, how-
ever, the easement would be binding upon any future owner of the servient prop-
erty for as long as the easement exists. Personal easements are not to be confused
with a license agreement. A license agreement is the right to occupy a property
only for a relatively brief period of time and is not considered to be a conveyance
of binding property rights. Examples of a license agreement would be tickets to
a movie or sporting event where the holder’s right is for only the duration of the
named event.
Creation of Easements
Easements may be created by the use of an express written agreement, may be
implied by the actions of a person, or may be created by the operation of law
(see Figure 2.7). The Statute of Frauds requires that all transfers of interest in real
property be in writing; therefore, an express easement cannot be created orally.
Express Easements
Express easements must be in writing according to the Statute of Frauds and
should be recorded. An owner selling his land can expressly grant an easement
to a buyer by using the appropriate language in the deed. In Figure 2.6, if A sold
the land to B, A could grant the easement to B to cross A’s land. If the situation
were reversed, and B sold the land to A, B would reserve the easement. The party
walls illustrated in Figure 2.8 are another example of express written easements.
A party wall is used by two adjoining neighbors to support the sidewall of each unit.
If the property line ran down the middle of the wall, each party would have a
cross easement in the other or would have a tenancy in common. If the wall were
1. Express (must be in writing according to statute of frauds)
a. Grant or reserve
b. Party walls
c. Dedication
2. Implied (actions of the parties)
a. Necessity
b. Reference to a recorded plat
3. Operation of law (court order)
a. Prescription
b. Condemnation
FIGURE 2.7 The way easements arise.
Source: © 2019 OnCourse Learning
© OnCourse Learning.
50 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
entirely within the property of one party, however, the other party would have an
easement in the use of the wall. Easements may be created by express dedication,
in which a portion of a property is set aside for use by the public. For example, a
developer who is building a residential subdivision may dedicate a portion of the
land for use by the public, such as roadways or recreational parks.
Implied Easements
In contrast to express easements, implied easements have no documentation. In
certain cases, the actions of a party create an easement when these actions dem-
onstrate an intent to create an easement. An easement by necessity is implied if a
seller conveys title to a buyer who would be landlocked without access to a road.
In Figure 2.6, if A sold the property to B and did not grant B the easement shown,
B would have the right to claim such an easement by reason of the necessity to get
to the public road. An easement by dedication may be implied as well as express.
If the developer described in the preceding section had not expressly granted the
roadways in the new subdivision but had described the property by referring to a
map showing the existence of such streets, the easement would be implied.
Easements by Operation of Law
An easement may be obtained by prescription, that is, by using another’s land for a
prescribed period of time. The use must be open and well known to others (notori-
ous) and must be continued and uninterrupted for the period of time required
by laws of the state. Users must prove in court that they have satisfied all the
requirements for the intended use. An easement also can be created by condem-
nation under the power of eminent domain of the government. This power ena-
bles the government to take private land for the benefit of the general public. In
all cases, the property owner must be compensated for differences in value before
and after the action by the government. Usually, condemnations for rights-of-way
Party wall
|—|
Property Line—Tenancy in Common Property Line—Easement
Party wall
|—|
FIGURE 2.8 Party wall.
© OnCourse Learning.
51Summary of Important Points
for various public uses are for the purpose of obtaining an easement rather than
for acquiring title.
A statutory cartway proceeding is another easement that can arise by operation
of law. The owner of a landlocked parcel of property can petition to have a cartway
sectioned off over someone else’s property. A three-person jury decides where the
cartway is to be and what damages the owner of the landlocked property must
pay the owners of the land where the cartway is located. Specific statutes govern
this proceeding. A cartway of at least 18 feet in width may be obtained to connect
the landlocked property to a public highway if the cartway is for the purpose of
cultivation or for using the land for one of the purposes listed in the statute.
Termination of Easements
Easements may be terminated as follows: by the release of the easement by the domi-
nant owner to the servient owner, by combining the dominant and servient lands into
one tract of land, by abandonment of the easement by the dominant owner, by the
cessation of the purpose for which an easement was created, and by the expiration of
a specified period of time for which the easement was created.
Encroachments
An encroachment is a trespass on the land of another as a result of an intrusion or
invasion by some structure or other object, such as a wall, fence, overhanging bal-
cony, or driveway. The encroaching owner may obtain title to the area of the land
upon which the encroachment exists by adverse possession (discussed in Chap-
ter 4) or may obtain an easement by prescription in the case of the encroach-
ing driveway if the owner of the land subject to the encroachment does not take
appropriate legal action. Because encroachments are illegal, the owner who is
being encroached upon can sue for damages (a judgment by the court requiring
the encroacher to compensate the owner for the encroachment) or can petition
the court for a decree ordering the encroachment to be removed.
Encroachments caused by building improvements straddling property bound-
aries are a major reason why lending institutions require surveys that specify
the location of all improvements on the property. Typically, the existence of an
encroachment is established by an accurate survey.
Summary of Important Points
1. Real property consists of land and everything attached to the land, includ-
ing things that grow naturally without requiring planting and cultivation.
Real property ownership is often described as a bundle of rights because it
involves many attributes.
© OnCourse Learning.
52 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
2. Annual crops that require planting and cultivation are personal property
and are called emblements or fructus industriales.
3. Ownership in land includes the surface of the earth and the areas above and
below the surface.
4. A fixture begins as personal property and becomes real property when
attached to land improvements or the land. Since fixtures create many prac-
tical problems in real estate transactions, practitioners need to pay careful
attention to this concept.
5. Private ownership of property is subject to four powers of government: emi-
nent domain, police power, taxation, and escheat.
6. Estates involve the definition of the scope of one’s interest in real property. Estates
in land are divided into two groups: freehold and estates of less than freehold
(leasehold). In freehold estates, one has an ownership interest in realty that lasts
at least a lifetime. The nonfreehold, or rental, interests last less than a lifetime.
7. The freehold estates are the fee simple estates, which are inheritable, and
life estates, which are not inheritable unless the life estate is for the life of
another (pur autre vie).
8. The most comprehensive form of ownership in real property is fee simple
absolute.
9. Life estates revert to the grantor or pass on to a remainderman.
10. The duration of a life estate is measured by the life of the life tenant.
11. Conventional life estates are created by someone’s intentional act. Legal life
estates, such as marital life estates, are created by operation of law.
12. A life tenant has the right of alienation, the right of encumbrance, the right
of estovers, and the rights of possession and enjoyment of the property and
of deriving certain income from it.
13. A life tenant is obligated to preserve and maintain the property for the ben-
efit of the future interest.
14. Title held in the name of one person only is called ownership in severalty.
15. When title is held concurrently by two or more persons or organizations, it
is called co-ownership (also, concurrent, or joint ownership). The forms of
co-ownership are tenancy in common, joint tenancy, tenancy by the entirety,
and certain aspects of condominiums and cooperatives.
16. Joint tenancy and tenancy by the entirety require the four unities of time,
title, interest, and possession. Tenancy by the entirety is limited to hus-
band and wife and requires a fifth unity, marriage (or unity of person), and
includes the right of survivorship.
17. The owner of a condominium unit holds title to the unit either in severalty
or as a co-owner with another, and she and any co-owners of the individual
unit hold title to the common areas as a tenant in common with the owners
of the other units.
© OnCourse Learning.
53Summary of Important Points
18. The creation of a condominium requires the recording of a declaration, arti-
cles of association, bylaws, and construction plans.
19. The North Carolina Condominium Act applies to the sale or resale of con-
dominiums created on or after October 1, 1986. This act provides consumer
protection by requiring a developer to disclose certain information on new
condominiums before a contract is signed, allowing the purchaser of a new
condominium a seven-day right to cancel the purchase, requiring owners of
resale units to disclose monthly assessments and other fees, and providing
an implied warranty that the unit is constructed in an acceptable manner.
20. Ownership in a cooperative results from stock ownership in a corpora-
tion that owns a building containing cooperative apartments. Stockholders
occupy apartments under a lease.
21. Business organizations may receive, hold, and convey title to real property.
22. Less-than-freehold estates also are called leasehold estates and are estates of
limited duration, providing possession and control but not title (as in the
case of freehold estates).
23. The leasehold estates are estate for years, estate from year to year, estate at
will, and estate at sufferance.
24. Encumbrances are things that diminish the bundle of rights. They may take
the form of a claim, lien, charge, or liability attached to and binding upon
real property. Examples are encroachments, liens, restrictive (protective)
covenants, easements, marital life estates, and deed restrictions. A lien is a
claim or charge against property that may result in the loss of title through
foreclosure. Restrictive covenants, lis pendens, easements, and encroach-
ments also encumber, or diminish, the full interest in title.
25. An appurtenance is a right or privilege that results from ownership of a par-
ticular property and transfers with the title. An appurtenance depends on a
principal item or the real estate. It belongs to that to which it is attached. It
cannot stand alone.
26. A fee simple absolute title is freely transferable by the owner because he has
the highest rights in the property, but the title may not always be free of
encumbrances. Fee simple titles often have encumbrances, which pass with
the title. To be effective, however, such encumbrances need to be recorded
where they are easily discoverable (with certain exceptions, such as the
potential for a mechanic’s lien).
27. A freehold and a nonfreehold estate can exist at the same time in a rental
property. The landlord retains the title (freehold) but has handed over the
right of possession (nonfreehold) for a period of time.
© OnCourse Learning.
54 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
Review Questions
Answers to the review questions are in the Answer Key at the back of the book.
1. Personal property attached to real property
is prevented from becoming real property by
which of the following?
A. value
B. an appurtenance
C. security agreement and financing
statement
D. mineral rights
2. Which of the following is a right in the
property of another that results from
ownership in a particular parcel of real
estate?
A. easement in gross
B. appurtenant easement
C. license
D. condemnation
28. Riparian rights are the rights of property owners adjoining a watercourse,
such as a river. Such owners have the right to draw reasonable amounts of
water from and enjoy access to the watercourse.
Boundary lines of property bordering water include the following:
a. Navigable waterway: Adjacent landowners own to banks.
b. Nonnavigable waterway:
1. One owner owning all the land surrounding water also owns the land
under water.
2. If more than one owner owns surrounding land, each owns land to
center of water.
c. Oceans or lakes where water levels fluctuate: Adjacent owners own to
mean high watermark.
d. State-owned land under navigable waterway and the foreshore (land
between high and low watermarks) of oceans and lakes.
29. A manufactured home can be considered either personal or real property
depending on whether the appropriate paperwork has been filed.
30. To be considered real property, the manufactured homeowner must remove
the wheels, axles, and towing hitch and also file an affidavit attesting to such.
31. Manufactured housing is built according to HUD standards.
32. Modular construction is built according to “stick-built” state building codes.
33. Modular construction is considered to be real property as soon as erected
on the foundation.
34. The most important elements of time-share rules are given in the Key Time-
Share Facts for North Carolina list on page 40 (the list is not repeated in its
entirety because of length and number of points).
© OnCourse Learning.
55Review Questions
3. Which of the following is (are) correct?
A. An easement provides a nonpossessory
interest in land.
B. The land on which an easement exists is
the dominant tenement.
C. The land that benefits from an easement is
the servient tenement.
D. All of the above
4. Easements may be created in all of the
following ways EXCEPT:
A. condemnation.
B. dedication.
C. prescription.
D. assessment.
5. An easement is terminated:
A. when the purpose for which the easement
was created ceases to exist.
B. when the adjoining dominant and servi-
ent tenements are combined into one tract
of land.
C. by abandonment of the easement by the
dominant owner.
D. all of the above.
6. If a property owner gives a specific person
permission to cross his property, this
is a(n):
A. easement in gross.
B. easement appurtenant.
C. lease.
D. encroachment.
7. The creation of an easement by
condemnation results from the exercise of
which of the following?
A. prescription
B. eminent domain
C. dedication
D. implication
8. A fee simple determinable:
A. is an example of a nonfreehold estate.
B. typically stipulates the conveyance is “as
long as” it is used for a particular purpose.
C. is an example of pur autre vie (for the life
of another).
D. is an example of freehold rights until the
original owner’s rights are determined to
be invalid.
9. If a widow inherits an estate by will granting
her the right of use and possession of a parcel
of land for the rest of her life, with the provision
that the estate will go to her children in fee
simple upon her death, she has received:
A. an inheritable freehold estate.
B. a life estate with remainder.
C. a life estate pur autre vie.
D. none of the above.
10. The highest and best form of estate in real
property is which of the following?
A. appurtenant easement
B. defeasible fee
C. life estate in reversion
D. fee simple absolute
11. Estate for years, estates from year to year,
estates at will, and estates by sufferance:
A. are leasehold estates
B. create a legal relationship between the
parties of landlord and tenant
C. are nonfreehold estates
D. all of the above
12. Title held in the name of a corporation with
many stockholders is considered to be held as:
A. severalty.
B. joint tenancy.
C. tenancy in common.
D. tenancy by entireties.
© OnCourse Learning.
56 CHAPTER 2 Property Ownership and Interests
13. Which of the following types of ownership
requires unity of interest, title, time, and
possession?
A. cooperative
B. tenancy in common
C. joint tenancy
D. condominium
14. None of the following includes the right of
survivorship in North Carolina EXCEPT:
A. tenancy in common.
B. tenancy by the entirety.
C. life estate.
D. joint tenancy.
15. The purchaser of a condominium unit
receives title to the land on which the
condominium is situated as a:
A. tenant by the entirety.
B. tenant in common.
C. joint tenant.
D. tenant at sufferance.
16. The purchaser of a condominium time-share:
A. takes title for a specified time period (or
periods) each calendar year.
B. may not convey title to anyone else.
C. has a 30-day right to rescind the purchase
contract.
D. all of the above.
17. In the cooperative form of ownership:
A. the owner owns his unit in severalty.
B. each owner owns an interest in the com-
mon areas.
C. the owners own the building as tenants in
common.
D. none of the above.
18. A tenant in common:
A. may sell her interest in the property.
B. may pledge the entire property as security
for a mortgaged loan.
C. may not bring legal action to partition the
property.
D. has the right of survivorship in the
property.
19. Ownership as tenants by the entirety includes
which of the following?
A. the right of one owner to convey title to
his share of ownership without the partici-
pation of the other owner
B. the right of survivorship
C. ownership of an unequal interest in the
property with another
D. conversion to ownership as joint tenants if
the owners are divorced
20. An encumbrance always:
A. has a positive effect on property value.
B. has a negative effect on property value.
C. is a lien.
D. none of the above.
21. All of the following are examples of specific
liens EXCEPT:
A. income tax liens.
B. mortgage liens.
C. mechanic’s liens.
D. real property tax liens.
22. Which of the following statements regarding
judgment liens is correct?
A. Judgment liens will not attach to property
to which title is held by a husband and
wife as tenants by the entirety unless both
participated in the creation of the debt
and are both named as defendants in the
judgment.
B. Judgment liens have a priority over the
real property tax assessment.
C. Judgment liens have a priority over all
liens other than property tax liens.
D. None of the above.
© OnCourse Learning.
57Review Questions
23. Liens, easements, encroachments, and
restrictive covenants are examples of which
of the following?
A. emblements
B. estovers
C. estates
D. encumbrances
24. Which of the following is an estate that
automatically renews itself for consecutive
periods?
A. estate at will
B. life estate
C. estate from year to year
D. estate for years
25. New construction time-share properties in
North Carolina require:
A. the developer to have a real estate license
before sales are made.
B. project registration with the Commission
before marketing the units for sale.
C. all time-share salespersons must have a
time-share license in NC.
D. the purchaser to be given a right of rescis-
sion for 3 days from purchase.
26. Time-share property in North Carolina:
A. must be for a residential use.
B. is considered personal property.
C. is the right to occupy a property during
five or more separated time periods over
five or more years.
D. allows a bona-fide employee of the devel-
oper to sell the units without a real estate
license.
27. An example of an appurtenant easement
would be:
A. city water and sewer easement.
B. easement for a neighbor friend to cross a
nearby property to access the beach.
C. an easement for the adjoining property to
have a driveway over the subject property.
D. a railroad right-of-way easement.
28. All of the following involve ownership of real
property EXCEPT:
A. cooperatives.
B. condominiums.
C. townhouses.
D. time-shares.
29. All of the following are real property EXCEPT:
A. standing timber.
B. underground minerals.
C. readily movable items.
D. naturally growing vegetation.
30. The item(s) included as real estate is (are):
A. trees.
B. fences.
C. a built-in microwave.
D. all of the above.
31. A manufactured home that is towed to
the land and placed upon a permanent
foundation but still has the wheels, axles, and
towing hitch attached will be considered:
A. personal property.
B. real property.
C. an improvement.
D. a fixture.
© OnCourse Learning.
3
CHAPTER
PROPERTY TAXATION AND
ASSESSMENT
KEY TERMS
ad valorem
appraisal
assessed value
assessment
market value
mill rate
mills
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
At the conclusion of this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe real property taxation and special assessment systems in North Carolina.
2. Describe the mill rate system used in the majority of other states.
IN THIS CHAPTER
The taxation on real property is the major source of revenue for the local units of government,
including both the county and the city or township. Taxes are imposed on real property ad valorem,
that is, according to value. North Carolina’s statute, known as the Machinery Act, sets forth the details
of property taxation. A key point of the act is that it requires the assessed value, or the value placed upon
property for purposes of taxation, to be set at true market value, or market value, a 100% assessment, at
least once every eight years. This reappraisal of property every eight years is called an octennial reap-
praisal. A horizontal adjustment upward or downward may be made at the four-year interval between
the eight-year adjustments.
An official called a tax assessor is responsible for the valuation of property for tax purposes.
Property values must be reasonably uniform to provide equal taxation of property owners. Many prop-
erty owners take advantage of an appeal process when they believe their property has been overvalued.
As a practical matter, a real estate agent can expect numerous phone calls from past clients asking
58
© OnCourse Learning.
59Tax Rate and Calculations
for information to support a value of their property that is less than the new
assessment if they believe that assessment is higher than the actual market value.
Often all they need is information on the selling prices of similar homes in their
neighborhood. If they need an appraisal, the agent should refer them to a licensed
appraiser.
Students will need to be prepared for questions regarding the mill rate method
of tax computation and for other rules regarding assessment rates that commonly
are used in other states. Such information is included in the sections Tax Rate and
Calculations and Appraisal and Assessment.
TAX RATE AND CALCULATIONS
Each local government sets a tax rate annually to meet the needs of its budget.
It does this by dividing the total assessed value of all the property subject to taxa-
tion by the amount of money needed for the budget. The rate is then applied to
the assessed value of the individual properties subject to taxation. The rate must
be sufficient to provide the revenue for the local government’s budget and may
be changed every year. North Carolina uses the formula of a tax rate per $100
of assessed valuation. Given the assessed value of the property and the current
tax rate, you can easily calculate the annual property taxes. For example, if the
assessed value is $185,500 and the tax rate is $1.50 per $100 of assessed value,
the annual tax is calculated as ($185,500 ÷ $100) × $1.50 = 1,855 units of $100 ×
$1.50 = $2,782.50.
Nationally, a more common form of tax calculation involves the mill rate. A
mill rate is a tax rate based upon one-tenth of one cent, or one mill. This equates
to one-thousandth of a dollar (i.e., 0.1 × 0.01 = 0.001 one mill). The tax rate is
typically stated in terms of “x” number of mills (i.e., 15 mills).
Test Tip!
Students need to be prepared for property tax problems using the “mill rate”
when taking the national portion of the state exam and using the “tax rate per
$100” in the state portion.
There are basically two easy ways to calculate taxes involving the mill rate:
1. Multiply the number of mills × 0.1 of 1 cent (i.e., 0.1 × 0.01 × number of
mills = mill rate as a decimal).
2. Divide the assessed value by $1,000 and then multiply by the mill rate.
“There are two zeros
in 100 and three zeros
in 1,000. Therefore, in
doing tax rate math
you can simply move
the decimal point two
places to the left for
problems using a tax
rate per $100 and
move the decimal
point three places to
the left for problems
using a tax rate per
$1000.”
—Steve Robinson
© OnCourse Learning.
60 CHAPTER 3 Property Taxation and Assessment
Example: What would be the tax bill for a property with an assessed value of
$185,500 that has a tax rate of 15 mills?
Answer: Solution is provided by illustrating both methods just addressed.
1. 1 × 0.01 × 15 = 0.015 (15 mills as a decimal)
2. $185,500 × 0.015 = $2,782.50 Tax Bill
OR
3. $185,500 ÷ $1,000 = 185.5 (# of $1,000)
4. 185.5 × 15 = $2,782.50
Students need to understand how to compute NC ad valorem property taxes.
Property Subject to Taxation
Generally, at some point, all real and personal property is subject to taxation in
North Carolina. Most people know of several exceptions to this generalization,
however, such as property owned by churches and nonprofit charities. According
to new tax laws, licensed personal property (such as automobiles) is now taxed
upon relicensing. The legislature also has exempted household goods from per-
sonal property taxation and eliminated the intangibles tax on funds in the bank.
Additionally, special cases exist for historic and certain types of agricultural prop-
erty and for the property of elderly and disabled people.
Listing Property for Taxation
All property subject to taxation must be listed with the local tax office. Real prop-
erty is listed in the county where the property is located; personal property is
listed in the county where the owner has her permanent residence, if this is dif-
ferent. The Machinery Act requires property to be listed during January, even
though the localities operate on a July 1 fiscal year. In certain circumstances in
which the taxing authority considers it necessary, it has a local option to extend
the listing period for another month.
Appraisal and Assessment
The distinction between appraisal and assessment often confuses people.
Appraisal is the process of determining a market value; it is discussed in detail
in Chapter 13. Assessment is the determination of a value of the property for
taxation purposes. As noted previously, real property in North Carolina must
be revalued, or reappraised, at least every eight years, at which time the assessed
value is set at 100% of the market value. As a practical matter, however, one would
not expect the two values to be identical at times other than this revaluation,
© OnCourse Learning.
61Tax Rate and Calculations
as the property usually appreciates in value over the course of the eight years.
As a result, the true market value, or simply market value, is historically higher
than the assessed value, although the economic conditions of the past few years
has certainly shown the assessed value can be much higher than the present mar-
ket value of a given property.
In many other states, it is quite common to see the implementation of an
assessed rate. The assessed rate is a percentage of the market value that is being
taxed. For example, if a state is taxing property at 75% of the market value, then
you would multiply 75% times whatever the market value is set to determine the
value for tax computation purposes (i.e., $160,000 market value × 75% = $120,000
assessed value). Typically, if the assessed value is reduced, the amount required to
be charged as the tax rate will be increased to collect the amount needed for taxes.
Timetable for Listing and Tax Collection
Real and personal property taxes attach to the property on January 1 when the
property is due for listing. The property owner has until January 31 to list the
property. Property taxes are due September 1 and are paid in arrears. Penalties
are assessed at the beginning of January if taxes are not paid at that time. Many
property owners think the taxes are due January 1 of the year after they are billed
in September because they do not have to pay a penalty for late payment until
then. All real estate agents should be aware that this is not the case; the taxes are
due September 1.
Important Dates for North Carolina Property Taxation
January 1 = tax lien attaches to property
January 31 = taxable property listed
July 1 = annual tax rate must be set
September 1 = tax bill is due and payable
January 5 of next year = last day to pay tax bill without late penalty
Property Tax Lien
In North Carolina, unpaid property taxes legally constitute a valid lien against the
property as of the first day of the tax year (January 1) even though the tax bills will
not be sent out until after July 1 and are not due until September 1.
As noted in the discussion of liens, the real property tax lien takes the first
priority. As such, it is an exception to North Carolina’s pure race system because,
in essence, the tax collector has already won the race to the courthouse, even
before the others start.
“Know the following tax
dates. Tax bills become
a lien in advance on
January 1st. Tax bills
generally go out in
July. The due date for
taxes is September 1st.
Taxes become delin-
quent January 1st of
the following year.”
—Len Elder, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
62 CHAPTER 3 Property Taxation and Assessment
Property taxes are lawfully considered a lien as of January 1 of the current
tax year even though tax bills are not due and payable until September 1.
Special Priority of the Tax Lien
Even though a lien is recorded against a property in one year, a subsequent
default in the payment of property taxes years later will take precedence over the
earlier recorded lien. As a practical matter, most creditors understand this situ-
ation and see to the payment of taxes so their lien priority is not disturbed. For
example, mortgage lenders prefer to collect monthly tax escrow payments from
the borrower so the lender has the funds to pay the taxes on time to protect the
mortgage lien.
Special Assessments
In addition to the ordinary property taxes that are collected by the local govern-
ment for normal operating expenses, taxes may be levied for special county, city,
or town projects (such as paving streets, building sidewalks, or installing sewer or
water lines) that benefit certain properties. The statutes allow a number of ways to
determine the amount of these assessments. A common way is to base the assess-
ments on the number of feet a property has that borders on the improvement.
This is referred to as a “front foot” and is a linear measurement along the distance
of what is being “fronted” (e.g., road, waterway, railroad).
By County
Counties have the authority to establish special assessments for new utilities to
the area, such as a new water reservoir or sewage treatment facility, that benefit
all properties within the jurisdiction. The statutes specify a detailed process of
determining the cost of the project, publishing a notice of the intended assess-
ment, and setting a schedule for the payment of the tax by the individual property
owners.
By City and Town
Procedures also are established for cities and towns to levy and collect special
assessments that are similar to those established for the counties.
Special Assessment Liens
As a real property tax lien, the special assessment attaches to the land and enjoys
a high, although unique, priority. This lien is behind the real and personal prop-
erty tax liens, but it takes priority over other liens.
“Late fees for real
estate taxes in NC
are called ‘Late Listing
Fees.’ They are pay-
able and due from the
seller and are not tax
deductible.”
—Tim Terry, DREI
© OnCourse Learning.
63Summary of Important Points
Math Concepts for this Chapter
• Calculation of ad valorem property taxes given the tax rate and
assessed value.
• Students should be able to perform calculations by using BOTH the North
Carolina rate of “per $100” or the mill rate (National Exam section).
Tax Calculations Using North Carolina Tax Rate
1. Kevin’s property has an assessed value of $178,500 and is being taxed at
the rate of $1.15 per $100. What would be the amount due for annual
taxes for this property?
2. Renee has a house located within the city limits that has an assessed value
of $145,000. The tax rate per $100 is $0.85 for the city and $0.50 for the
county. What are her annual taxes for this property?
Tax Calculations Using Mill Rate
3. Pam has a property that is assessed at $225,500 and is being taxed at the
rate of 15 mills. What are the annual taxes due for this property?
Solutions
1. $178,500 ÷ $100 = 1,785 number of $100 increments
$1.15 × 1,785 = $2,052.75 annual taxes due
2. $0.85 + $0.50 = $1.35 tax rate per $100 for city and county
$145,000 ÷ $100 = 1,450 number of $100 increments
$1.35 × 1,450 = $1,957.50 annual taxes due
3. $225,500 ÷ 1,000 = $225.50
$225.50 × 15 = $3,382.50 annual taxes due
Summary of Important Points
1. The Machinery Act established the rules for property taxation in North
Carolina.
2. The assessed rate for property in North Carolina is 100% of market value.
3. The assessed value is the value placed on property for purposes of taxation.
Historically, the assessed value will be less than the active market value.
4. Tax rates for North Carolina are per $100 of assessed value.
5. Students will be required to calculate property taxes by using both the North
Carolina system of “per $100” as well as the mill rate method.
6. Tax rates can be changed annually. Do not confuse this with the fact that tax
values are to be adjusted at least every eight years.
© OnCourse Learning.
64 CHAPTER 3 Property Taxation and Assessment
7. Tax values may be modified every four years by using a horizontal adjust-
ment. A horizontal adjustment is different than the eight-year reappraisal
in that a horizontal adjustment simply applies a set percentage increase
for all properties in the affected area. For example, if the county wishes to
implement a 20% horizontal adjustment, all properties in that area will be
increased in value by 20%. The eight-year reappraisal is more of a “door-to-
door” analysis of property value.
8. Property that is owned as of January 1 of each year is to be listed for tax
purposes no later than January 30.
9. Tax bills must be mailed out by September 1, at which time they are payable.
10. Taxes are to be paid by December 31. There will be interest penalties charged
if taxes are not paid by January 5 of the following year.
11. An assessment is the pro rata share of the cost of some improvement, such as
sidewalks, water and sewer lines, and street improvements.
12. Assessments typically are charged by the front foot.
13. A front foot is a linear measurement of the width of the property along the
side that is being improved.
14. The mill rate system is used for most states in the United States.
15. One mill is the equivalent of 0.1 of 0.01.
Review Questions
Answers to review questions are in the Answer Key at the back of the book.
1. The tax levy against real property to provide
the funds to pay all or part of the cost of an
improvement to the property is which of the
following?
A. mechanic’s lien
B. special assessment
C. general lien
D. judgment lien
2. Real property taxation in North Carolina:
A. requires listing the property by
December 30.
B. makes September 1 the due date
of the tax.
C. requires penalties for paying after
September 1.
D. none of the above.
3. How often may the North Carolina
property tax rate be changed?
A. every eight years
B. every four years
C. every two years
D. each year
4. The Jones’s home has an assessed value of
$100,000 in a locality where the tax rate
is $1.45 per $100. What is their monthly
payment for tax escrow?
A. $83
B. $100
C. $121
D. $1,450
© OnCourse Learning.
65Review Questions
5. The tax rate is calculated on every $100 of
the:
A. sales price.
B. appraised value.
C. listing price.
D. assessed value.
6. According to the Machinery Act in North
Carolina, all real property must be reassessed
for tax purposes at least:
A. every year.
B. every two years.
C. every four years.
D. every eight years.
7. Kim’s house is located within the city limits
and has a market value of $240,000. The local
tax office is assessing her property at 75% and
there are tax rates per $100 of $0.95 for the
city and $0.35 for the county. What are her
annual taxes for this property?
A. $1,710.00
B. $2,280.00
C. $2,340.00
D. $3,120.00
8. Carol’s property has an annual tax bill of
$1,495.00 and an assessed value $130,000.
What is her tax rate per $100? (rounded)
A. $11.50
B. $1.15
C. $0.87
D. $0.01
9. A municipality has total assessed value
of property located within its environs of
$18,057,000. They have recently adopted an
annual budget of $162,513. At what rate per
$100 must they tax the local properties in
order to meet this budget?
A. $0.90
B. $1.14
C. $9.00
D. $11.43
10. George’s property recently sold for $235,000
and has an assessed value of $215,000. If the
local tax rate is $1.40 per $100 how much
would the annual taxes for this property be?
A. $3,290
B. $3,150
C. $3,010
D. $250.83
11. A parcel of land is being taxed at a rate of 25
mills. Assuming that it has a market value of
$175,000 and is being assessed at 70%, what
would the annual tax liability be?
A. $4,900.00
B. $4,375.00
C. $3,062.50
D. $1,225.00
12. A parcel of property (not a corner lot) that
measures 95 feet wide by 175 feet deep is
being assessed $8.50 per front foot for water
and sewer lines that are being installed.
How much will the assessment be for this
particular property?
A. $2,295.00
B. $1,615.00
C. $1,487.50
D. $807.50by Peter Conti and Peter Harris
Commercial
Real Estate Investing
FOR
DUMmIES ‰
Commercial Real Estate Investing For Dummies ®
Published by
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
111 River St.
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774
www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2008 by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as per-
mitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600.
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Legal Department, Wiley Publishing,
Inc., 10475 Crosspoint Blvd., Indianapolis, IN 46256, 317-572-3447, fax 317-572-4355, or online at http://
www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, A Reference for the
Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way, Dummies Daily, The Fun and Easy Way, Dummies.com and related trade
dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United
States and other countries, and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are the
property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc., is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book.
LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY: THE PUBLISHER AND THE AUTHOR MAKE NO REP-
RESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF THE
CONTENTS OF THIS WORK AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT
LIMITATION WARRANTIES OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO WARRANTY MAY BE CRE-
ATED OR EXTENDED BY SALES OR PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS. THE ADVICE AND STRATEGIES CON-
TAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE SUITABLE FOR EVERY SITUATION. THIS WORK IS SOLD WITH THE
UNDERSTANDING THAT THE PUBLISHER IS NOT ENGAGED IN RENDERING LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR
OTHER PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. IF PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE IS REQUIRED, THE SERVICES OF A
COMPETENT PROFESSIONAL PERSON SHOULD BE SOUGHT. NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR THE
AUTHOR SHALL BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES ARISING HEREFROM. THE FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION
OR WEBSITE IS REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK AS A CITATION AND/OR A POTENTIAL SOURCE OF FUR-
THER INFORMATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE AUTHOR OR THE PUBLISHER ENDORSES THE
INFORMATION THE ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR RECOMMENDATIONS IT MAY
MAKE. FURTHER, READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT INTERNET WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS WORK
MAY HAVE CHANGED OR DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK WAS WRITTEN AND WHEN IT
IS READ.
For general information on our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care
Department within the U.S. at 800-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.
For technical support, please visit www.wiley.com/techsupport.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2007941165
ISBN: 978-0-470-17491-3
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
About the Authors
Peter Conti and Peter Harris are known as the World’s #1 Greatest
Commercial Real Estate Mentors. They partnered years ago by combining
their existing Mentoring practices. They have both started from modest
beginnings, Peter Conti was an auto mechanic, and Peter Harris was an intro-
verted engineer. The portfolio of properties they have purchased nationwide
with their Commercial Mentoring Program students continues to grow at an
accelerated rate.
Peter Conti is the CEO of MentorFinancialGroup.com and lives on the
Chesapeake Bay with his wife and kids in Annapolis, Maryland.
Peter Harris has purchased and put together commercial and residential real
estate deals across the country for years. He has taught, mentored, and
instructed many of the most successful investors across the nation. Harris
and Donald Trump are coauthors of Three Master Secrets of Real Estate
Success. He also sits on the board of advisors on several private and national
real estate investment and development companies.
Many years ago, Peter Harris received the gift of a great mentor in his career
and in his every day life, who guided and encouraged him to always get out of
his comfort zone and play a bigger game. Mentoring one-on-one or to hun-
dreds at a time around the nation is Peter’s way of giving back and imparting
the message of hope and faith in the dynamic and rewarding world of real
estate. Even though Peter’s first career was a physicist, holding several U.S.
patents on outer space simulation, the school of hard knocks was where he
got his real education in the business world.
Besides his business life, Peter’s passions include hanging out with his son
PJ, serving at his church, smiley faces, and riding his bike hundreds of miles
at a time. Peter Harris lives in the heart of San Francisco with his son, PJ.
You can e-mail the authors at mentor@mentorfinancialgroup.com, or
you can call them at 800-952-9585.
A Free Gift from the Authors: Your Bonus
Commercial Quick Start Training Package
Here’s your chance to join the authors for over six hours of training that just
wouldn’t fit in the book so that you can hit the ground running with your
commercial real estate investing. You’ll get to listen in, watch, and respond as
they guide you in putting together highly profitable commercial deals.
Here’s what you get:
 Over 6 hours of audio and video commercial investing training
sessions
 Special form “Addendum A,” which gives you up to 90 days to
decide if you want a deal or not
 A Quick Start exclusive: The Money Raising Workshop
 Audio interviews with leading commercial real estate investing
experts
You’ll discover:
 The fastest way to get started investing in commercial real
estate
 How to retire in five years or less
 Insider secrets to finding deals
 How to buy commercial real estate with no money
 Three steps to quickly fund even the biggest deal
 How to explode your net worth with land development
You’ll also receive this special report: “The 3 Best Places to Buy Commercial
Property Today”
Get your Commercial Quick Start Training Package (a $299 value) by
registering your copy of this book at www.commercialquickstart.com.
Enter code CFD101.
Dedication
Peter Conti: This book is dedicated to Peter Harris. You are an incredible
blessing in my life.
Peter Harris: I dedicate this book to God first and foremost. I thank Him
for His faithfulness, His love and grace, and for all of the amazing people
He blesses me with. I also thank my great mentor, a great man named Nick
Tsujimoto. Thank you, Nick, for your wisdom and love, for our many “closed
door” sessions, and for helping me set and achieve awesomely scary goals.
Lastly, I want to thank my partner Peter Conti for being the man and friend
that he is and always will be. And to everyone else: The best is yet to come!
Authors’ Acknowledgments
From both authors:
To every one of our Commercial Mentoring Program students. This book,
along with all of the fun we’ve had and all of the properties we’ve bought
together, would not be possible without you. Your courage motivates us
every day. To Tim Gallan and Mike Lewis at Wiley publishing, we don’t know
how you do it. Thanks for giving us a little breathing room.
From Peter Harris:
To PJ, for always hanging in there with Dad. You are the greatest son a father
could ever ask for. I love you, dude.
To Steve, Gary, Abe, Marge, June, Beck, Lela, Stone, Steph, and wonder boy
Kyle, for always cheering for me.
To Da’ Girls, you know who you are! Thanks for being warriors in your lives
and mine. I am the wealthiest man on earth because of who and what we
share together. The best is yet to come!
From Peter Conti:
This book wouldn’t have happened without the awesome changes I’ve seen
in my life over the past few years. Thank you, God, for such a great life and
especially for surrounding me with so many wonderful people. Joanna, I love
you. I miss you girls. You grew up so fast. Son, our time together is precious
to me.
To everyone at MentorFinancialGroup.com: Marilyn, Angela, and Jeff. Wow!
You are the most incredible and fun people I’ve ever had the privilege to work
with. To Deb, Elizabeth, Kevin, Elaine, and Molly, you are the backbone of the
Mentor Family. All of you have proven that nothing is impossible for the man
who doesn’t have to make it happen.
To all of our coaches, Peter Harris, Cheryl, Rob, Stephen, Emily, Juli, Cleve,
Jeff, Matt, and David. Your daily support and encouragement for our
Mentorship students is changing the world.
To Mr. X in one of the southern states. Your passion for helping all of our stu-
dents to profit from every single deal they do with us is the keystone of the
Mentor System. You deserve the credit even though you wish to remain
anonymous.
To my friends in Christ: Brett, Rob, Peter, Baden, Tom, Thomas, Stephen, and
Robb. Thank you for your leadership and guidance. And Rob, that praying
over your wife thing you taught me is awesome!
To Mom, Dad, Lisa, Debbie, Linda, John, Paul, and Matthew, I love you.
Publisher’s Acknowledgments
We’re proud of this book; please send us your comments through our Dummies online registration
form located at www.dummies.com/register/
Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include the following:
Acquisitions, Editorial, and
Media Development
Senior Project Editor: Tim Gallan
Acquisitions Editor: Michael Lewis
Copy Editor: Jessica Smith
Editorial Manager: Michelle Hacker
Editorial Assistants: Joe Niesen, Leeann
Harney, David Lutton
Cartoons: Rich Tennant
(www.the5thwave.com)
Composition Services
Project Coordinator: Kristie Rees
Layout and Graphics: Reuben W. Davis,
Alissa D. Ellet, Brooke Graczyk,
Christine Williams
Anniversary Logo Design: Richard Pacifico
Proofreaders: Cynthia Fields, John Greenough,
Bonnie Mikkelson
Indexer: Steve Rath
Special Help
Elizabeth Kuball
Publishing and Editorial for Consumer Dummies
Diane Graves Steele, Vice President and Publisher, Consumer Dummies
Joyce Pepple, Acquisitions Director, Consumer Dummies
Kristin A. Cocks, Product Development Director, Consumer Dummies
Michael Spring, Vice President and Publisher, Travel
Kelly Regan, Editorial Director, Travel
Publishing for Technology Dummies
Andy Cummings, Vice President and Publisher, Dummies Technology/General User
Composition Services
Gerry Fahey, Vice President of Production Services
Debbie Stailey, Director of Composition Services
Contents at a Glance
Introduction .................................................................1
Part I: Getting to Know Commercial
Real Estate Investing ....................................................7
Chapter 1: Just Imagine . . . Commercial Real Estate and You! .....................................9
Chapter 2: A Crash Course in Commercial Real Estate Investing ..............................19
Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate ............................................................33
Part II: Getting Started Making Deals ..........................57
Chapter 4: On Your Mark, Get Set, Go Find Deals ........................................................59
Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating............................................75
Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework........................................................97
Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal ........................................................................................117
Part III: Funding Your Deals:
Financing and Lending..............................................137
Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options ...............................................................139
Chapter 9: Getting Creative with Financing ................................................................163
Chapter 10: Raising Capital and Forming Partnerships ............................................177
Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations...........189
Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship? ..............................191
Chapter 12: Protecting Your Assets .............................................................................213
Chapter 13: Why Properties Fail...................................................................................223
Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear ............241
Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers .............................243
Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate..................267
Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies ...................................................289
Chapter 17: Leaping into a Commercial Real Estate Career .....................................309
Part VI: The Part of Tens ...........................................327
Chapter 18: Ten Ways to Increase Your Property Value ............................................329
Chapter 19: Ten or So Easy Ways to Network.............................................................335
Index .......................................................................341
Table of Contents
Introduction..................................................................1
About This Book...............................................................................................1
Conventions Used in This Book .....................................................................2
What You’re Not to Read.................................................................................2
Foolish Assumptions .......................................................................................2
How This Book Is Organized...........................................................................3
Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing ...............3
Part II: Getting Started Making Deals ...................................................3
Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending .........................4
Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations .................................4
Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear ....................................4
Part VI: The Part of Tens .......................................................................5
Icons Used in This Book..................................................................................5
Where to Go from Here....................................................................................5
Part I: Getting to Know Commercial
Real Estate Investing.....................................................7
Chapter 1: Just Imagine . . . Commercial Real Estate and You! . . . . . .9
What Is Commercial Real Estate?.................................................................10
What to Think About As You Get Started....................................................11
Can I make money at commercial real estate investing? ................11
What type of investor am I? ................................................................12
Do I have to be a genius to crunch the numbers?............................13
What investing opportunities are available? ....................................14
How does financing work? ..................................................................15
Understanding the Risks of Commercial Real Estate ................................15
Avoiding lawsuits, the most feared risk ............................................16
Risk-proofing your investment plan...................................................17
Chapter 2: A Crash Course in Commercial Real Estate Investing . . . .19
How Is Commercial Real Estate Different
from Residential Real Estate?....................................................................20
Why Invest in Commercial Real Estate? ......................................................21
What Types of Investments Are Available?.................................................22
Apartment buildings (also known as residential properties).........22
Offices and warehouses.......................................................................22
Retail centers ........................................................................................24
Hotels and resorts ................................................................................24
Land development................................................................................25
What You Need to Get Started......................................................................26
No real estate license required...........................................................26
A few technical skills............................................................................27
Myths and Questions about Investing in Commercial Real Estate ..........28
Timing the Commercial Real Estate Market ...............................................29
Knowing whether to buy, hold, or bottom-fish ................................30
Trends are your friends .......................................................................32
Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .33
Talking the Talk: Terms You Need to Know ................................................33
Figuring Out What a Property Is Worth.......................................................35
Not-so-obvious tips on analyzing .......................................................35
Breakeven analysis...............................................................................38
Establishing and following guiding principles..................................40
Running the Numbers on Some Properties ................................................40
Analyzing an apartment deal ..............................................................42
Analyzing a retail shopping center ....................................................43
The Professional Approach to Valuing Properties.....................................47
Approach #1: Comparable sales.........................................................47
Approach #2: Income ...........................................................................48
Approach #3: Cost to replace the property ......................................49
Understanding What Creates Value .............................................................50
Use: How the property is used gives value .......................................50
Leases: As the lease goes, so goes the value ....................................51
Location: The unchangeable factor ...................................................53
Differentiating a Good Deal from a Bad Deal ..............................................53
Cash-flow investors..............................................................................53
Long-term investors .............................................................................54
Short-term investors ............................................................................54
Part II: Getting Started Making Deals...........................57
Chapter 4: On Your Mark, Get Set, Go Find Deals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .59
Discovering the Secret to Finding Great Deals ...........................................59
Defining your property search ...........................................................60
Developing relationships.....................................................................61
Getting Leads on Commercial Property Investments................................61
Newspaper ads and publications .......................................................62
Internet sites of commercial real estate ............................................62
Government agencies ..........................................................................62
Realtors and brokers............................................................................63
Property owner associations ..............................................................64
Real estate investment clubs ..............................................................65
Looking Locally and Nationwide ..................................................................66
Surveying the pros and cons of local investing................................66
Investing outside of your community................................................67
Determining your location with demographics................................68
Commercial Real Estate Investing For Dummiesxiv
Locking Down Deals: Don’t Leave Home without These Tools ................69
Allowing the Great Deals to Find You ..........................................................70
Attracting owners with reports ..........................................................70
Making unsolicited offers ....................................................................71
Discovering properties that have been relisted...............................72
Unlisted properties: Hidden fish in the streams ..............................73
Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating . . . . . . . . . .75
Increasing Your Chances of Getting Your Offer Accepted ........................75
Starting with the end in mind .............................................................76
Sizing up the sellers and what they really want ...............................76
Sealing Deals: The Instant Offer System......................................................77
Step 1: Build rapport with the broker or seller ................................78
Step 2: Establish an upfront agreement.............................................80
Step 3: Build the broker’s or seller’s
motivation level for selling ..............................................................80
Step 4: Determine the financial details
of the deal (The Money Step)..........................................................82
Step 5: Find the critical pieces to a
winning deal (The What-If Step) .....................................................85
How to Meet the Seller When Submitting Your Offer ................................86
Writing Up the Offer.......................................................................................87
Letter of intent ......................................................................................87
Commercial contract to buy and sell real estate .............................88
Liquidated damages clause.................................................................89
Memorandum of agreement................................................................90
Presenting Your Offer in the Best Light.......................................................90
The Five-Step Deal Filter ...............................................................................91
Filter 1: The five-minute test ...............................................................91
Filter 2: Sign it up!.................................................................................91
Filter 3: The quick view........................................................................92
Filter 4: The “realists” check ...............................................................93
Filter 5: End users determine the value.............................................93
The Seller Has Accepted My Offer! Now What? .........................................94
Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .97
What Is Due Diligence? ..................................................................................97
Making due diligence a team effort ....................................................99
Getting to the truth about due diligence.........................................100
The First Things You Need to Do ...............................................................102
Scope out the property......................................................................102
Get a title commitment ......................................................................102
Look at the property’s numbers.......................................................103
Creating Checklists for Effective Due Diligence .......................................104
Physical due diligence checklist ......................................................104
Financial due diligence checklist .....................................................105
Legal due diligence checklist ............................................................107
xvTable of Contents
Managing the Whole Process .....................................................................109
Opening an escrow.............................................................................109
Getting a preliminary title report .....................................................110
Keeping an eye on contingencies .....................................................112
You Found Problems, What Now? ..............................................................114
Renegotiating with the seller ............................................................114
Making the final decision: Stay in or run away? .............................115
Setting the sails for the closing date................................................116
Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .117
The Anatomy of a Close ..............................................................................118
Closing 101: The Basics of Closing a Deal .................................................118
What is an escrow and who is an escrow officer?..........................119
What is title insurance? .....................................................................119
Do I need an attorney for my closing? .............................................120
Do closing costs differ in commercial real estate? ........................121
Is it better to close at the end or beginning of the month? ..........121
How long does it take to close a commercial deal? .......................122
The Big Picture Show: Questions to Ask
Yourself Before You Pull the Trigger ......................................................122
What are my exit strategies?.............................................................123
Are my investment goals being met? ...............................................123
Sweating the Details before Signing on the Dotted Line .........................124
The title work......................................................................................124
The closing instructions and closing statement ............................125
The lender ...........................................................................................126
Closing Day: What to Expect.......................................................................126
What’s on a closing statement? ........................................................127
What exactly will I be signing?..........................................................128
What should I do before signing? .....................................................129
When am I officially closed?..............................................................131
Taking Legal Ownership ..............................................................................131
You’re the Boss Now: What Next?..............................................................132
Stage 1: Assess the situation.............................................................133
Stage 2: Assemble the team ..............................................................133
Stage 3: Secure the site ......................................................................134
Stage 4: Use the info that you discovered .......................................134
Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending ...137
Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .139
The Commercial Lending Process in a Nutshell ......................................140
Seeing the process through your lender’s eyes .............................140
Keeping things moving without incident ........................................141
Differences between Commercial and Residential Lending ...................142
The property’s merits matter more than
the borrower’s qualifications ........................................................143
The down payment requirement is higher......................................143
Commercial Real Estate Investing For Dummiesxvi
How Lenders Evaluate Properties..............................................................144
Determining the property’s income .................................................144
Revealing the quality of the property..............................................146
Assessing the strength of the borrower ..........................................148
Getting Your Lender to Say “You’re Approved!”.......................................149
What’s needed from you....................................................................150
What’s needed regarding the property............................................150
What lenders like in a deal ................................................................151
What lenders don’t like in a deal......................................................152
Choosing the Best Loan for You .................................................................152
Getting to know conventional lenders.............................................153
Understanding the available conventional loans...........................154
Selecting a lender for your deal........................................................156
Deciding what you want out of your property ...............................157
Determining how much the loan will cost you ...............................158
Knowing the costs of getting out of a loan......................................159
Controlling the interest rate (to some extent) ...............................160
Assuming the Seller’s Preexisting Mortgage.............................................161
Chapter 9: Getting Creative with Financing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .163
Creative Financing Techniques ..................................................................164
The Master Lease Technique......................................................................165
Getting Someone to Carry Secondary Financing .....................................166
Getting the Owner to Carry Seconds and
Other Secondary Financing.....................................................................167
Why secondary financing works ......................................................167
Finding sources of secondary financing..........................................168
Understanding common pitfalls of secondary financing ..............169
Getting the owner to help you out by financing
all or part of the purchase.............................................................170
Dealing with seller objections ..........................................................171
Operating the Wraparound Mortgage Like a Surgeon .............................172
Using an Option to Buy ...............................................................................173
Leveraging the Equity in Your Portfolio....................................................174
Employing blanket mortgages ..........................................................174
Drawing on 401(k)s or IRAs...............................................................175
Chapter 10: Raising Capital and Forming Partnerships . . . . . . . . . . .177
Identifying the Keys to Raising Private Funds..........................................177
Building Your Rolodex of Potential Investors...........................................178
Creating relationships with potential investors.............................179
Using executive summaries to nab potential investors ................182
Connecting with your investors .......................................................183
Deciding Whether to Go It Alone or Use a Partner or Two.....................184
Creating the Right Teams and Partnerships.............................................185
Structuring your partnership ...........................................................186
Knowing how much to pay your investors .....................................186
xviiTable of Contents
Writing up the agreements to use with your investors .................187
Considering how long you want to partner with someone...........187
Interviewing a potential partner ......................................................187
Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations ...........189
Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship? . . . .191
I’m the Boss: Managing Your Commercial Property Yourself.................191
Improving your management skills with a few basic tips .............192
Developing basic business systems.................................................193
A do-it-yourselfer’s checklist ............................................................194
Training your tenants to respect you and the property ...............195
Operating successfully day-to-day with
the proper people and tools..........................................................197
Letting Go: Using Professional Property Management Companies .......199
Understanding the ins and outs of professional
property management....................................................................200
Deciding to hire a professional property
management company ...................................................................201
Searching for property management candidates ...........................202
Interviewing your prospective managers .......................................202
Checking credibility and capability .................................................203
Drafting the property management agreement ..............................205
Getting your reports: Monthly and weekly accountability ...........207
Knowing How to Be an Effective Absentee Owner ..................................210
Chapter 12: Protecting Your Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .213
Taking Asset Protection Seriously .............................................................214
Create a plan to avoid lawsuits ........................................................214
Plan for the worst and be happy if it doesn’t happen ...................215
Building a Legal Fortress for Personal Assets ..........................................215
Making use of entities ........................................................................216
Don’t throw your entities under the bus.........................................217
Gathering essential fail-safe documentation...................................219
Common-Sense Protection Tips .................................................................219
Treat others as you would like to be treated..................................220
Meet any potential problems head-on.............................................220
Always have proper insurance coverage ........................................221
Chapter 13: Why Properties Fail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .223
What Is a Property Failure?.........................................................................224
How You, the Investor, Can Cause Failure.................................................224
You made a bad deal ..........................................................................225
You have too much debt....................................................................227
You’re in denial regarding problems................................................228
How Management Can Cause a Property to Fail ......................................229
How the Market Can Cause Failure ............................................................232
Commercial Real Estate Investing For Dummiesxviii
The ups and downs of real estate cycles ........................................232
The influence of demographics ........................................................233
Folding Up and Walking Away.....................................................................234
Knowing when to fold ........................................................................235
Choosing to walk away honorably ...................................................235
Tried and True Tips on Surviving and Thriving.......................................236
Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear .............241
Chapter 14: Making a Success Out
of Commercial Fixer-Uppers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .243
Just What Is a Commercial Fixer-Upper? ..................................................244
Distressed and poorly performing property...................................244
Distressed and poorly performing owner .......................................245
Uncovering Diamonds in the Rough ..........................................................246
How to find fixer-uppers....................................................................246
Where to buy.......................................................................................249
Taking action before those great opportunities disappear ..........249
Figuring Out What a Fixer-Upper Is Worth................................................251
Determining your cash flow ..............................................................251
Figuring your NOI, cap rate, and sales price...................................252
Running the numbers on an example property..............................253
Mapping Out a Fixer-Upper Game Plan .....................................................255
Perform due diligence........................................................................256
Before fix-up and after: Bridging the gap to payday ......................258
Determining your break-even point .................................................259
Creating checkpoints for the renovation process..........................260
Avoiding Headaches and Pitfalls (Or at Least Minimizing the Pain) .....263
Recognize hopeless situations .........................................................263
Hire good contractors (and think like one
when you do projects yourself)....................................................264
Timing Your Fixer-Upper for a Quick Sale.................................................266
Chapter 15: Land Development: The
Heart of Commercial Real Estate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .267
The Pros and Cons of Investing in Land....................................................267
The pros...............................................................................................268
The cons ..............................................................................................268
Understanding What Makes Land Worth More ........................................269
Knowing Whether You’re in the Right Market..........................................269
Getting an outside expert’s opinion.................................................271
Examining the path of progress........................................................271
Identifying the Three Ps for Successful Projects .....................................272
Investing in Land with a Team....................................................................273
Finding the Best Places to Invest in Land .................................................274
xixTable of Contents
With Land, Time Really Does Equal Money ..............................................274
Using contracts to get more time.....................................................277
Buying time with options ..................................................................277
Changing the Property’s Zoning and Getting Approved to Develop .....278
Determining what to build on your land .........................................278
The approval process and why it frustrates
many would-be investors...............................................................281
Getting the Green Light on Your Deal........................................................283
Dealing with bureaucrats ..................................................................284
Avoiding neighborhood opposition .................................................286
Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . .289
An Overview of Money-Making Tax Strategies .........................................290
Appreciation........................................................................................290
Depreciation........................................................................................291
Paying down the mortgage ...............................................................291
Rolling over .........................................................................................292
Being an Investor or a Dealer: The Difference Is Huge............................292
Holding real estate long term as an investor ..................................292
Buying and selling quickly as a dealer.............................................293
Naming Yourself a Real Estate Professional: It Pays................................293
Choosing Your Entity: An Important
Tax Preparation Before You Buy.............................................................295
Sole proprietorships ..........................................................................296
Corporations .......................................................................................296
Limited liability companies...............................................................297
Limited partnerships .........................................................................297
Digging into Depreciation............................................................................297
The magic of depreciation.................................................................299
Don’t “recapture” your depreciation ...............................................299
Cost segregation: Saving thousands more
by separating your property parts...............................................300
The 1031 Exchange: Avoiding Taxes by
Trading In for Another Property.............................................................302
Before anything else, get expert help ..............................................303
Surveying the exchange rules...........................................................304
Taking Advantage of Some Commonly Overlooked Deductions............305
Accounting expenses .........................................................................306
Consulting expenses ..........................................................................306
Home office expenses ........................................................................306
All property-related expenses ..........................................................307
Transportation to and from your properties..................................307
Expenses for your technology gizmos.............................................307
Chapter 17: Leaping into a Commercial Real Estate Career . . . . . . .309
Becoming a Commercial Sales Agent.........................................................309
Four myths of commercial real estate sales ...................................310
Four truths of commercial real estate sales ...................................310
Commercial Real Estate Investing For Dummiesxx
Real estate agent versus real estate broker....................................311
Getting your foot in the door ............................................................312
Living the life of a commercial sales agent .....................................313
Being a successful independent broker ..........................................316
Making a Go of It as a Property Manager ..................................................317
A quick look at the different property
manager hats you can wear...........................................................317
Choosing the type of property you want to manage .....................318
Starting out as a property manager .................................................319
Finding a job as a property manager ...............................................320
Cashing In on a Commercial Mortgage Business Career ........................320
Choosing a role to play......................................................................321
Jumping in ...........................................................................................322
Becoming a lending machine ............................................................323
Arriving As a Commercial Appraiser .........................................................324
Finding appraisal work ......................................................................325
Working as an appraiser ....................................................................325
Part VI: The Part of Tens............................................327
Chapter 18: Ten Ways to Increase Your Property Value . . . . . . . . . . .329
Raise the Rents .............................................................................................329
Budget Your Way to Wealth ........................................................................330
Give the Property a Makeover....................................................................330
Change the Property’s Use..........................................................................331
Add Goodies to the Property......................................................................331
Stand Up to the Tax Man .............................................................................332
Pass Utility Expenses to Tenants ...............................................................332
Renegotiate the Leases................................................................................333
Bring in a New Management Team.............................................................334
Split Up Your Land .......................................................................................334
Chapter 19: Ten or So Easy Ways to Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .335
Get Your CCIM Designation.........................................................................335
Put Power in Your Search Engines .............................................................336
Go Directly to the Investment Firms..........................................................337
Read the Trades ...........................................................................................337
For Apartment Owners: Join the NAA .......................................................338
For Office Building Owners: Get Involved with BOMA ............................339
For Shopping Center Owners: Enlist with the ICSC .................................339
For Property Management Professionals:
Become Affiliated with the IREM ............................................................340
Stay Current and Connected.......................................................................340
Index........................................................................341
xxiTable of Contents
Commercial Real Estate Investing For Dummiesxxii
Introduction
Welcome to Commercial Real Estate Investing For Dummies! We both love
commercial real estate and are thrilled to be able to share our passion
with you. In this book’s chapters, we provide you guidance by showing you
our experiences and the combined experience of thousands of our Mentorship
students who have invested with us across the country since 1995.
Investing in commercial real estate allows you to:
 Make much larger amounts of money while putting in almost the same
amount of work that smaller deals, such as single-family houses, require.
 Establish multiple streams of income that are generated by properties
that almost run themselves. In fact, you discover how to be in command
of everything right from your home office.
 Retire in five years or less. Sounds impossible, doesn’t it? Well, it
really isn’t!
The downside of investing in commercial real estate is that it does take some
time to get up to speed. Plan on getting a good education before you jump
into your first deal. Oh, and if you’re frightened by the prospect of making
hundreds of thousands of dollars from just one deal, investing in commercial
real estate is probably not the right path for you.
About This Book
This book is your complete how-to guide for investing in commercial real
estate. You may want someone who’s already investing to help you oversee
your first deal or two, but our goal is to give you enough information so that
you’ll be able to go out and find, structure, and negotiate profitable, money-
making deals on commercial properties.
In these pages, you have all the answers to complex issues broken down into
an easy-to-read format. Start at the beginning, in the middle, or simply pick a
section that interests you most. It doesn’t matter where you start because
the most important thing is that you begin today. You may have been looking
for your opportunity to become your own boss, make more money than your
stockbroker, or simply be able to retire fast by investing in commercial real
estate. Now, with this book, you finally have the opportunity and the informa-
tion you need to take charge.
We mention our students a lot in this book, and that’s because we do 82 per-
cent of our investing with our Commercial Mentoring students across the
country. We hope that by sharing the success of others who are just like you,
we’ll be able to encourage you to do whatever it takes to live the life of your
dreams.
Conventions Used in This Book
We include the following few conventions to help you make your way
smoothly through this book:
 Important terms are shown in italics, with definitions following the
terms.
 Boldfaced words highlight the keywords in bulleted lists and numbered
steps.
 Web sites are printed in monofont.
When this book was printed, some Web addresses may have needed to break
across two lines of text. If that happened, rest assured that we haven’t put in
any extra characters (such as hyphens) to indicate the break. So, when using
one of these Web addresses, just type in exactly what you see in this book,
pretending that the line break doesn’t exist.
What You’re Not to Read
If you’re in a hurry as you read through this book, you can skip over some of
the anecdotes and sidebars (the text in the gray boxes). These bits of text are
interesting, but not essential to your understanding of the basics of commer-
cial real estate investing. However, most of them contain interesting and help-
ful info that you’ll likely want to go back and read when you get a chance.
Foolish Assumptions
When writing this book, we kept a few assumptions in mind about you:
 You’re interested in real estate but you’re probably not as rich as Donald
Trump. However, we assume that you aren’t broke and looking for
money to make your next house payment either.
 You have some experience in business, management, or real estate
investing, whether it is in commercial real estate or not.
2 Commercial Real Estate Investing For Dummies
 You’re sharp enough to be investing in commercial real estate, so you
aren’t going to rely on us for legal, tax, or other professional advice.
After all, one of us is a former auto mechanic, so you should take every-
thing we share with you as our real-world experience. That means you
need to combine that experience with the counsel from your own
attorney and your tax professional.
How This Book Is Organized
The text of this book is organized into self-contained chapters that you can
read in any order. Think of this book as a reference that you can pick up and
read bits and pieces of whenever you have the time. (Of course, we’d love it
even more if you read the thing from cover to cover.) The chapters are
arranged in parts, and here’s what each part covers.
Part I: Getting to Know Commercial
Real Estate Investing
This part is where you might just fall in love with commercial real estate
investing. Understanding what types of property make up commercial real
estate and getting past some of the biggest myths about it will provide a
strong foundation that you can use to support all the other in-depth informa-
tion you get in this book. In this part, you also discover just how simple it is
to quickly determine the value of any commercial property. After you under-
stand this formula, you’ll be able to confidently hold your own while negotiat-
ing your way to your newfound fortune.
Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
In this part, you discover the four essential steps to every commercial deal
you put together. For instance, you find out where the best sources of bro-
kers, sellers, and properties can be found. Then we jump into some serious
deal making by sharing with you our Instant Offer System, which shows you
how to make successful offers. And because all big commercial deals need to
be checked out before you make the final move to buy them, you need to
understand how to use due diligence and the closing process to uncover
hidden problems, negotiate prices down, or determine when the best deal for
you is not to buy. We end this part, appropriately enough, by showing you
how to close a deal.
3Introduction
Part III: Funding Your Deals:
Financing and Lending
Okay, so you’ve hooked a big deal and are reeling it in. Making sure that you
have all the funding you need is critical at this point. In this part, you find out
how to get approved for conventional financing. Or, if you like the idea of get-
ting creative and buying commercial real estate without using any of your cash
or credit, check out Chapter 9. We close out this part with a chapter in which
you discover the secrets of raising private capital from outside investors. In it
we also show you how to put together profitable partnerships.
Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership
and Operations
Now that you have bought a property, who’s going to mind the ship? You may
be amazed to find out that it isn’t always going to be you! In this part, we
cover important points such as how to pick commercial properties that can
afford to pay for outside management. And we help you keep tabs on your
important investments by revealing our simple “manage the manger”
process. In this part, you also uncover the secrets of protecting your assets.
Unfortunately in today’s world it isn’t what you make but what you keep that
really counts. Finally, you get an insider’s look at something you won’t find in
most investing books: the reasons why some properties fail and how you can
avoid making the same mistakes.
Part V: Kicking Your Investing
into High Gear
When you start feeling like a pro and you’re ready to jump into the fast lane,
this is the part for you. These are the chapters where we really get you up to
speed. For instance, we introduce you to commercial fixer-uppers. We also
help you discover the insider secrets to taking a piece of land through the
approval process so that it can be developed. Owning commercial real estate
combined with the ideas Chapter 16 can save you tens of thousands of dol-
lars in taxes every single year. Finally, in this part you find out how to jump
into a commercial real estate career for extra income or to get an insider’s
edge on the deals you’re putting together.
4 Commercial Real Estate Investing For Dummies
Part VI: The Part of Tens
In this traditional For Dummies part, you quickly discover some important
information. For example, we provide the top ten ways to increase the value
of your commercial properties. We also include ten great organizations that
you should consider joining.
Icons Used in This Book
In this book, we highlight certain types of information with icons so you can
find what you’re looking for fast. Here are the icons we use and what they
mean:
The text highlighted by this icon usually consists of helpful ideas and strate-
gies to make your investing easier.
This icon highlights important points that are essential to your successful
investing.
Investing is fun but it also has pitfalls that you need to watch out for, so this
icon does the job.
When we attach this icon to text, you know that you can be sure to get the
real-world scoop from stories and investing ideas that come from Mentorship
students and our own deals.
This icon reminds you to do more research, hire an inspector, or consult with
an attorney or tax advisor.
Where to Go from Here
This book is written so that you can jump into the shallow end or you can go
off the high dive, depending on your experience level. You can begin any-
where you want — none of the chapters need to be read before any of the
others. So, if you need a refresher course, start with Part I. If you’re more
experienced and want to kick your investing into high gear, check out Part V.
5Introduction
Otherwise, simply peruse the table of contents or the index to find what
you’re looking for. To understand what commercial investing can do for you,
check out Chapter 1. Whatever you do, don’t let this book get out of your
hands without reading Chapter 15, which is all about land development. In
this chapter, you can find out how some of our most passionate students
have made millions — yes, that’s millions of dollars — doing big land devel-
opment deals.
6 Commercial Real Estate Investing For Dummies
Part I
Getting to Know
Commercial Real
Estate Investing
In this part . . .
In this part, we help you understand what types of
property make up commercial real estate and also
help you get past some of the biggest myths about it. We
present information that will enable you to simply and
quickly determine the value of any commercial property.
After you understand this formula, you’ll be able to confi-
dently hold your own while negotiating your way to your
newfound fortune.
Chapter 1
Just Imagine . . . Commercial
Real Estate and You!
In This Chapter
 Discovering commercial real estate
 Knowing what to consider as you get started
 Finding the ultimate investment
 Risk-proofing your investment plan
Can you imagine yourself in the world of commercial real estate invest-
ing? Imagine yourself walking through the lobby of your 100-unit apart-
ment complex. What would it look like and feel like to be pulling into the
parking lot of a neighborhood shopping center that’s all yours? Maybe you
can imagine that you’re watching your construction crew break ground on
your luxury home land development project. What if this project leads to a
life where you can live a life of luxury and balance? You’d be able to do things
such as drive your kids or grandkids to school every day, maybe even in your
pajamas, with a big smile on your face because you’ve invested wisely. Okay,
here’s one more scenario that may get you excited: Imagine yourself impact-
ing the lives of hundreds or thousands of kids here and around the world
who benefit from your charities, all funded by wealth-building skills and invalu-
able relationships developed from your commercial real estate investing.
We have two purposes for writing this book. The first is to introduce you to
commercial real estate investing. We want to share with you that anyone can
learn how to successfully find, research, negotiate, finance, and buy commer-
cial real estate of any type. In this book, we do our best to break down power-
ful investing concepts that were once thought to be too complex for most
people. Our second purpose for this book is to give you the confidence to go
after what you really want in life instead of shying away from the true poten-
tial that you’ve always known is somewhere inside of you. To make this jump
as easy as possible, you even get a free Commercial Quick Start Training
Package, which will allow you to quickly implement the moneymaking ideas
in this book. See the About the Authors section at the front of the book for
details.
Creating the wealth that allows you to follow your real passion is what’s wait-
ing for you whether you’re an investor, real estate agent, or lender. Commercial
real estate will accelerate your financial freedom, and in the process our hope
is that you’ll find the true meaning of the “why” in your life. That alone makes
this book worth diving into.
What Is Commercial Real Estate?
Commercial real estate is many things. It’s office buildings, apartment com-
plexes, shopping centers, warehouses, industrial parks, hotels, motels,
resorts, and the list goes on and on. It’s where businesses are conducted and
where many people live together. Commercial real estate is everywhere.
(Jump to Chapter 2 for a journey through all the different types of commer-
cial real estate that are available.)
Commercial real estate is also a means of building long-lasting wealth for the
investor. To us, long-lasting wealth is an investment that pays you every
month. It’s also one in which the value increases every year. Compare this to
other types of investments that may allow you to draw a monthly payment,
but the balance goes down year by year until the pot’s empty. Sound familiar?
That’s not true wealth at all. In this book, we show you how commercial real
estate has the ability to generate sizable cash flow every month as well as
increase in value every year (and to be tax free!). We challenge anyone to find
a better way out of the rat race than to invest in commercial real estate.
Commercial real estate can afford you a wonderful and fulfilling professional
career that’s second to none. And besides being enjoyable, commercial real
estate investors are among the highest paid professionals in the nation. In
fact, it isn’t uncommon for a commercial investor’s check from just one clos-
ing to equal one year’s salary of an engineer. We see it all the time. We also
get to hang out with and see the changes our Commercial Mentorship stu-
dents are going through. Many of them have joined “The Quitters Club” by
saying goodbye to their 9 to 5 jobs. These friends of ours absolutely love
what they do and can’t dream of doing anything else.
Every ultrasuccessful investor or high-income-generating professional we
know in this business knows the secret — it’s relationships. Commercial real
estate is at its core a relationship business. For instance, big deals, huge fees,
and long-lasting and fulfilling careers can all be created through the relation-
ships you make. We talk more about relationships later on in this book.
As you’re out and about, start looking around at all the commercial real estate
that you see. When you go to the shopping center, notice what space is leased
out. What buildings aren’t fully leased? Why might that property be having
trouble? After you realize that an investor owns every building, it’s difficult
to not think about owning your own commercial properties someday. To get
10 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
started investing now, try out the free bonus that’s waiting for you at www.
commercialquickstart.com. As a reader of this book, you get three
online training courses and a one-on-one strategic coaching session.
What to Think About As You Get Started
When choosing to make an investment in anything, you have to take several
things into consideration, right? Why am I doing this? How much does it
cost? Am I doing this at the right time? Well, the same applies for commercial
real estate. In fact, you may find that you have too many choices simply
because there are so many different ways to profit in this field. The following
sections go over some of the most common questions you may have when
deciding which part of commercial real estate is right for you.
Can I make money at commercial
real estate investing?
This is one question that we have a definitive answer for: Yes! We know that
you can make money investing in commercial real estate for three reasons:
 If we can do it, you certainly can too. Both of us started from modest
beginnings and we aren’t special by any means. In fact, coauthor Peter
Conti used to be an auto mechanic. Coauthor Peter Harris was an intro-
verted engineer.
 We are blessed to be surrounded by our Commercial Mentoring Program
students who for the most part have started with little or no experience
in commercial real estate. Every time a Mentorship student gets another
deal they prove that it really is possible.
 If you look at the most successful investors out there you’ll find that they
all have a pattern in common: They’ve typically started out by investing
in homes, running a business, or working in a fairly well-paying profession.
The next step is to begin investing in smaller commercial properties such
as apartment buildings. At some point the successful investors all move
up to either big commercial deals or land development.
Coauthor Peter Harris started out investing in real estate by purchasing single-
family homes. He did quite well in it, but one day he was daydreaming and
said to himself, “What if I could combine all my rental homes under one roof?”
He felt that would make managing the properties a lot easier because he
wouldn’t have to drive around the city chasing rents. In fact, he realized that
he could make better use of the time that he saved by investing even more!
When he woke up from his daydream, he realized that he had just described
11Chapter 1: Just Imagine . . . Commercial Real Estate and You!
an apartment complex. To make a long story short, he sold all of his rental
homes and bought large apartment complexes. And the rest is history. His
cash flow went from hundreds per month to thousands per month in only
two years.
If he can make it starting out where he did as an introverted engineer, and now
he’s buying commercial properties worth millions, you certainly can too. You
see, Peter is simply an average person who applied the ideas in this book to
change his life. If he can do it, anyone can use commercial real estate invest-
ing to transform his or her life.
Throughout this book, we show you what “good real estate” looks like, and
we tell you how to time the real estate market, what markets to stay away
from, and how to know a good deal from a bad deal Then we set you up with
some powerful guiding principles of investment and some free ongoing train-
ing to help move you forward.
What type of investor am I?
You can fall into one of two basic types of commercial real estate investors.
The first is the cash-flow investor, and the second is the long-term hold
investor. Both make excellent cases for fantastic wealth building and both
can do well in an up or down market. Read on for details.
Cash-flow investor
Cash-flow investors purchase properties for the purpose of putting monthly
income into their pockets. And they buy commercial real estate just like you
would buy a business. In other words, if you were buying a ready-made busi-
ness, you would do whatever it takes to make sure that the business is a
proven moneymaker, right? You would thoroughly check the financial records
to prove that it could stand on its own every month. Well, cash-flow investors
do the same. They take every measure to make sure they’re investing in a
property that produces nice monthly cash flow.
Also, cash-flow investors don’t solely rely on appreciation as a way to get
wealthy. They know that appreciation is only a bonus, a gift. If it’s present,
great. If it isn’t, that’s okay, because the focus is on income. Cash-flow
investors know that relying on appreciation is a form of gambling and doesn’t
make good business sense. In Chapter 3, we show you how to easily evaluate
and calculate cash flow for any income-producing property just like the
experts do.
Another plus for cash-flow investors that’s frequently overlooked is the abil-
ity to weather the storm in a down market. In down markets where sales are
slow and prices are falling, people who normally would buy homes to live in
aren’t buying homes due to fear. These folks eventually become tenants for
12 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
your multiunit commercial properties. This helps cash-flow investors to actu-
ally make more money in a down market.
Long-term “hold” investor
Unlike cash-flow investors, long-term “hold” investors rely on appreciation
for wealth building, but they do so in a more conservative real-world fashion.
They also benefit equity wise from paying down the loan amount over a
number of years.
The long-term hold investor’s goals are simple: They want deals with an
upside, like the ability to increase the value by improving the cash flow of
the property. For example, some of the wealthiest investors we know are our
mentors, who are older gentlemen who bought their pieces of commercial
real estate decades ago. One of them bought land and another bought apart-
ments. Their philosophy was “Good real estate will always have a higher
value over many years if I wait long enough.” It’s a too-simple strategy that
has worked incredibly well for many patient investors. Both of these gentle-
men held onto their properties in three separate down market cycles over
the years. Both have properties that are debt free, and they have made mil-
lions of dollars since.
In this book, we cover the basic foundational strategies such as “buy good
real estate and wait” (Chapter 8) along with many of the more creative, accel-
erated wealth building strategies just in case you’re in a hurry (Chapter 9).
Do I have to be a genius
to crunch the numbers?
Honestly, the only requirement needed to crunch numbers is to be able to
count to ten with your fingers (or at least be able to use a calculator). What
you’ll find is that any type of income-producing property can be analyzed by
simply splitting up the deal into three parts:
 Income
 Expenses
 Debt (mortgage payment)
The process for figuring out the cash flow for a 30-unit apartment complex
is the same as the process for a single-family home. For instance, say you
bought a three-bedroom, two-bath home and you’re renting it for $1,200 per
month. As the landlord, you’re responsible for property taxes, insurance, and
a landscaper. All those expenses total $300 per month. You also pay $800 per
month for your mortgage. The tenant pays all other expenses. Here’s a quick
formula for figuring out cash flow per month:
13Chapter 1: Just Imagine . . . Commercial Real Estate and You!
Income – expenses – debt = cash flow per month
Using the numbers from the previous single-family home example, here’s the
formula in action:
$1,200 (income) – $300 (expenses) – $800 (debt) = $100 (cash flow)
Wasn’t too difficult, was it? Now, here’s an example for a 30-unit apartment
building. You have 30 two-bedroom units renting for $500 per month. That
totals $15,000 per month in income. Total expenses for the 30 units are $6,000
per month (which includes taxes, insurance, maintenance, and property man-
agement costs). The mortgage payment is $5,000 per month. Here’s how the
formula works to find the cash flow per month:
$15,000 (income) – $6,000 (expenses) – $5,000 (debt) = $4,000 (cash flow)
This concept applies for office buildings and shopping centers as well. Just
remember that for any property you want to analyze, you need to get the
income first, the expenses second, and the debt payment third. From
there, you can see whether the property makes any money. In this book,
we go through this concept in much more detail. In fact, after going through
the real-life examples that we provide, your confidence level should be
incredibly high.
What investing opportunities are available?
Gee, where do we begin to discuss how many types of opportunities you have
to choose from when investing in commercial real estate? It may sound cliché,
but there’s something for everyone. If you like the cash flowing dynamics of
the apartment business, there are exciting times ahead for you. How about
making huge chunks of money developing land? What about the stability of
owning office buildings? Consider also the endless growth of shopping centers.
Throughout this book, we explain how to find deals and how to spot the
gems as well as how to tell the difference between a good, bad, or average
deal. As examples, we give you simple and practical guidelines to follow as
well as real deals.
When investing in a property, you have two choices:
 You can invest in a property that’s “ready to go” with no necessary
repairs, problems, or other hiccups.
 You can invest in properties that have lots of problems and need to be
fixed up. Commercial fixer-upper opportunities are in every city. Just like
you can do with a residential property, you can fix up, flip, and profit
with commercial property.
14 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Big investment returns await you if you take the time to study the fixer-upper
how-tos shown in Chapter 14. We like the commercial fixer-uppers because
after the rehab is complete, most times you can hold for cash flow, hold for
long-term wealth generation, or flip for ‘instant” profits that you once thought
would take years and years of hard work to earn.
How does financing work?
Are there differences between obtaining a loan for a single-family home and a
neighborhood shopping center? The answer is yes, of course, but the differ-
ences may surprise you. Pretty much all you need to get a home loan is a
good credit score, and then you have to make enough money to pay the
mortgage. When you get a loan for a commercial property, the lender is often
interested more in how the property performs than she is in your credit
score. For commercial real estate, getting a loan is based on the following
three main qualifications:
 Does the property produce enough income to cover the expenses and
mortgage?
 What is the condition of the property?
 What is the financial strength of the borrower?
In commercial real estate financing, the borrower (the investor), is number
three on the priority list. In other words, a strong cash flowing property in
good condition will almost always outweigh the poor credit (or no credit) of
the borrower. (Flip to Chapter 8 to discover how to get your lender to say
“yes” to your deal, what lenders like and dislike in deals, and tips on choos-
ing the best loan for your deal.)
Understanding the Risks of
Commercial Real Estate
Is commercial real estate risky? You bet it is. One of our mentors always said,
“Anything you go after of great worth has great risk.” Commercial real estate
investing involves big dollars and lots of people. And whenever you have lots
of money and people working together closely, trouble is right around the
corner. But risk is a facet of doing business — any business. You can’t avoid
it. The best thing you can do to protect yourself is to understand all the risks
that are possible, and then get your advisors involved to help you figure out
how to avoid them. Don’t skimp on getting the best advisors you can hire
either. As the saying goes, “It’s expensive being cheap.”
15Chapter 1: Just Imagine . . . Commercial Real Estate and You!
But here’s the good news: Risks can be managed to levels of great certainty.
Being successful in commercial real estate nearly always means taking calcu-
lated risks. Are you willing to risk some of your time and money to be finan-
cially free? What if you could secure your family’s financial future? There are
risks with everything you do in life. You may have heard of people who spend
their whole lives trying to avoid taking any risks, and in the process they
accomplish nothing. What a shame. The point is that sooner or later you’ll
probably have to step out of your comfort zone to free yourself from the
rat race.
Will you consider taking only a little bit of risk? If so, you may want to start
out with a smaller multifamily building. Or maybe you want to roll the dice
big time. In this case, check out Chapter 15 for more on land development,
which can satisfy the riskiest adventurer.
One of the risks of real estate investing is that if you aren’t careful the prop-
erty can fail. We include a whole chapter in this book (Chapter 13) on why
properties fail, because real estate investing and the decisions we make don’t
always turn out well. Sometimes you just make a bad deal. And sometimes
you may hire the wrong property management company. And other times the
market may take a turn for the worse and send you in a downward spiral.
Chapter 13 may be the most important chapter you read because under-
standing why properties fail can enable you to spot where your property
needs some help. Or, if you’re looking at a deal, knowing why properties fail
helps you analyze why the property is in its current condition. And don’t
forget that understanding why properties fail can put you in a great negotiat-
ing position and assist you in solving property problems.
Avoiding lawsuits, the most feared risk
The most feared risk in commercial real estate investing is getting sued.
Every tenant you have can be a potential lawsuit. You can also be sued by
contractors, city personnel, and the list goes on and on. How do you protect
yourself? Here are two lines of defense:
 Obtain property liability and hazard insurance.
 Choose a protective form of ownership or holding, such as a limited
liability company.
Limited liability companies (LLCs) are by far the most popular form of owner-
ship used today to hold commercial real estate. Warning: The worst possible
method of holding title is to hold it individually in your name. This way, you
have zero liability protection and absolutely no privacy. In Chapter 12, we
offer many tips and strategies for holding and protecting your property and
assets. Your goal should be to build a “legal fortress” with the right experts.
16 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Risk-proofing your investment plan
In our years of investing and watching numerous successful and not-so-suc-
cessful investors go at it, we have come up with several fail-safe measures
(we call them common-sense measures!) for risk-proofing your investing.
Here they are:
 Do proper due diligence. Due diligence is the process you go through
when verifying the financial documents of the property, performing a
physical inspection, and checking out the legal pieces of the property,
such as the title. Ninety percent of all deals die during due diligence. So,
if you don’t do a thorough job, the consequences can be costly. You may
end up buying a property that’s a money pit. However, when done prop-
erly, due diligence can actually help you make your sweet deal even
sweeter. Reading Chapter 6, which provides the ins and outs of due
diligence, may save you millions of dollars.
 Don’t overpay. Overpaying is common among new investors. Don’t be
the investor in a deal where the agent sets a record price on selling a
property! If you’re buying apartments, make sure that you’re aware of
what price you’re paying per unit. If you’re buying a shopping center,
make sure you know how much you’re paying per square foot. In both
cases, see what the recent market closings value your property at.
Paying too much will lock up the property’s cash flow for a long time.
(See Chapter 3 for more on pricing your prospective properties.)
 Have expert market knowledge. Knowing your market like the back of
your hand sets you up for success. Before you close on your deal, make
sure you know the following:
• How competitive your rents are with other similar local properties
• When and if there’s a “slow season” for rentals so you can plan
ahead
• Whether there’s rent control in your city, which would inhibit you
from raising rents as you thought you could
17Chapter 1: Just Imagine . . . Commercial Real Estate and You!
Getting extra help
Why go it alone when we’re here to help you?
As a reader of this book, you get additional
free material and training at www.commer
cialquickstart.com. At this site, you’ll
get your Commercial Quick Start Training
Package which includes six hours of audio
with your authors Peter and Peter, video training
sessions, free commercial analysis software,
and more! See the About the Authors section
at the front of the book for details.
We also like to inquire on crime statistics on the property in question by
calling the local police department.
 Hold your goals loosely. What we mean is that you should keep your
investment’s exit strategy flexible at all times. In fact, have several exit
strategies ready at any given time. Market conditions change. Your per-
sonal circumstances can change rapidly as well. So, don’t get wrapped
up in executing just one exit strategy, because it may no longer apply.
 Know where you are in the real estate cycle. There are four parts to
any real estate cycle: expansion, contraction, recession, and recovery.
By reading Chapter 2, you can figure out where your particular city is in
the cycle and you can determine when to buy, sell, hold, or bail. Each
part of the cycle demands that you pay detailed attention to your invest-
ment decisions. Understanding real estate cycles helps you take the cor-
rect actions with the best timing. There’s nothing like timing the market
like a pro!
You can discover more about controlling the risk in your commercial invest-
ments as you go through this book. You may have thought that risk-proofing
was impossible, but you’d be surprised at what a little knowledge can do to
your investment portfolio.
18 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Chapter 2
A Crash Course in Commercial
Real Estate Investing
In This Chapter
 Understanding the basics of commercial real estate
 Surveying the types of investments available
 Discovering the tools you need to get started
 Debunking the myths of investing in commercial real estate
 Keeping timing in mind when selling, buying, and holding
What comes to mind when you think of commercial real estate? Down-
town skyscrapers? Corner strip malls? Apartment complexes? Okay,
that’s a good start. But have you thought about being the owner of one? Too
complex you say? Too expensive you think? Jumping into commercial real
estate investing could be the wisest and most lucrative investment you ever
make. To us, the benefits outweigh the risks. But find out for yourself.
In this chapter, you find out what commercial real estate is, and you discover
the different types available. We break down the big world of commercial
investing into easy-to-follow categories so that you can pick and choose your
favorites. We also uncover the five biggest myths that stop people from
investing and understanding commercial real estate.
Because the value of commercial real estate depends on the cash flow that it
produces, we show you how cash flow is made on a monthly basis, and we
help you discover the steps to building long-term wealth. We also tell you
when it’s the most profitable time to buy, hold, sell, or bail (we even share
with you ways of predicting the future!). By the end of this chapter, you’re
sure to be convinced that commercial real estate is, by far, the best way to
produce true and lasting wealth.
How Is Commercial Real Estate Different
from Residential Real Estate?
Here’s our definition of commercial real estate: It’s any piece of real estate
that’s bigger than one house on one lot. So, commercial real estate includes
everything from small apartment buildings (five or more units) and large
office buildings to shopping centers, to industrial parks, and even land
development.
The three biggest differences between commercial real estate and residential
real estate include the following:
 Commercial real estate projects are passive investments only after
they’re up and running. Remember that unless you have a ton of
money and don’t care about getting huge returns, commercial real estate
will take a lot of your time and effort to get started. After all, you have to
deal with many things, including the learning process, finding the right
mentors or teachers, searching for the right deal, financing your invest-
ment, picking management teams, protecting it from lawsuits, and over-
seeing the project.
The good news is that after you have a commercial project off the ground,
it’s usually big enough that it allows you to pay other people to take care
of it. So it won’t take much of your time at all — and that’s why it’s called
a passive investment. Compare this to a single-family home that may
require collecting rents and making repairs for many years to come.
 Commercial real estate has the potential to make you rich with just
one deal. Doing one commercial deal the right way can generate you a
profit several times your yearly salary in addition to providing you siz-
able monthly income as long as you own the property. Residential real
estate can produce a sizable profit as well, but it will not generate any-
where near the cash flow that a commercial property will. You’ll receive
one check per month from a single-family residence, but you can receive
several hundred checks per month from a commercial property.
If you don’t believe us, consider these numbers: When several of our
Commercial Mentoring Program clients were sharing how they got
started in commercial real estate, we found out that one of them is in
a project that already has a profit of $10 million or more. Another one
bought a piece of land near his home for $1.5 million, and it has jumped
in value over the past two years to $9 million (and he didn’t even have
to use his own money).
 The people that you meet who invest in commercial real estate are all
big thinkers. They’re people who have decided that they want to think
big, live big, and hang around other people who are just as passionate
20 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
about life as they are. Until you get involved, it’s difficult to really under-
stand just what your life could look like. Investors of residential real estate
think of one monthly check and one tenant, they wait for appreciation
(which may never come), and they’re limited in ways of creating massive
value for their property.
Why Invest in Commercial Real Estate?
We think commercial real estate investing is a great way to generate wealth,
and the main reason we like it so much can be boiled down to one word:
leverage. Leverage is what allows you to use a small amount of your time and
money to bring you a magnified return. Commercial properties are usually
bigger and more valuable than other types of real estate, such as houses. What
this means to you is that after you figure out how to find, negotiate, and buy
commercial property without using much of your own money, you’ll be able
to sit back and watch the magic of leverage work wonders for your financial
future. Your family will thank you for generations to come.
When people get started with their investing, most of them dream of creating
a six-figure annual income stream so that they can quit the rat race. However,
deep down many of them have doubts that they can actually make it happen.
But never fear. The goal of this book is to give you the starting steps and
specific know-how to help you realize that you really can live the life of your
dreams. And we want you to do it in a way that creates the lifestyle you want
without years of hard work. We’ve helped other clients do it, and we know
you can do it too.
Understand that there are still going to be naysayers out there who say you
can’t invest in commercial real estate in today’s market, in today’s economy,
or in today’s cosmic layering of celestial occurrences. But you have a choice.
You can either buy into what these financially stressed-out individuals are
desperately clinging to, or you can let go of everything that’s been holding
you back and go after the future that you want and deserve.
Let us be clear: Commercial real estate allows you to make whopping piles of
money. With commercial real estate you can make anywhere from $20,000 to
$50,000 on a little deal. And, you can make $10 million or more from a bigger
property. Sound interesting? Does it take work? Sure it does. But a $100,000
commercial deal doesn’t take anywhere near ten times the work that a
$10,000 residential deal takes. So what you’re doing is working at a higher
level that rewards you with the opportunity to make a lot more money with
just a little more effort.
21Chapter 2: A Crash Course in Commercial Real Estate Investing
What Types of Investments
Are Available?
Most people think commercial real estate is all about apartment rentals. Even
though residential properties are a big part of commercial real estate invest-
ing, other types of properties make for excellent investment opportunities as
well. For instance, commercial real estate includes offices and warehouses,
retail centers, and even undeveloped land.
We define commercial real estate as any real estate that’s bigger than one
house on one lot. So even if people live in the property, it’s still commercial
as long as it’s bigger than one house. Some people would argue that a little
property like a duplex or a four-unit isn’t really commercial. That’s ok. We like
keeping our definitions simple. Actually, five or more units in an apartment
building is considered commercial, but who’s counting? We explain each of
the different types of commercial property in the following sections.
Apartment buildings (also known
as residential properties)
The commercial properties that are in the residential category include every-
thing from small apartment properties (five or more units) to huge apartment
building projects that cover several city blocks. You drive by thousands of
commercial properties like this every day (or you may even live in one). Every
single building you see is owned by a commercial investor who’s in the game
to make money. (Now anytime you see a nice apartment building, you won’t
be able to stop thinking about getting into commercial real estate investing.)
What we find great about investing in apartments is that they’re easy to find,
banks love to lend on them, and they’re great cash flow generators.
The advantage of starting off with residential properties is that they’re a great
way to jump into the exciting world of commercial real estate investing. We both
started off investing in small- to medium-sized multiunit properties. This was
a great experience because it allowed us to make the jump to get started. For
most people, getting started is the hardest part. However, after you’ve started
investing in commercial real estate, you’ll have a difficult time going back to
the old grind of the rat race that so many others find themselves trapped in.
Offices and warehouses
After you get the itch to invest in commercial real estate, you’ll never walk
into an office building again without thinking, “somebody owns this building.
Why couldn’t it be me?”
22 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
As our populations expand, more and more office and warehouse buildings
are being constructed. Offices and warehouses are great for investing because
they have what we call triple net leases. This type of lease is one where the
tenants in the property pay you the rent plus they also pay for the following:
23Chapter 2: A Crash Course in Commercial Real Estate Investing
How a college dropout turned $4,000
into a $120,000 profit in 60 days
Tom was the kind of teenager in high school
who thought that he didn’t need anyone else
because he had all the answers. Too “smart” to
go to college, Tom worked a variety of jobs until
he found himself working as a bouncer in a bar
and surviving on 69 cent cans of beans. Well,
you can probably imagine where Tom ended up:
He found himself at age 22 with no real friends
and a pretty bleak-looking future.
For some reason, Tom had the wild idea that he
could somehow make money investing in real
estate. So, he drove around town talking to
agents and looking at properties. One day he
saw a sign on an empty lot that said “Exxon
Corporation Land for Sale.” Tom didn’t know
much about land, but after looking at the county
records he figured that the property might be
worth about $200,000.
After calling and meeting with the agent, he was
able to put a contract in place to buy the land
for $160,000. But now Tom had a big problem
because the agent was calling about the $4,000
earnest money deposit that Tom had promised
to give to him. So he went down to the bank and
talked them into lending him the $4,000 based on
the value of his car, which was the only real
asset that he had.
Now Tom was faced with the problem of having
to close the deal in 120 days or he would lose
his deposit and perhaps his car too. So, he went
back to the county office and looked at all the
other parcels of land around his piece that he
had under contract. He saw that there was a
larger lot behind his property that could have its
access restricted depending on how he devel-
oped his property.
With the help of an architect, Tom put together
two sets of plans. One set showed a larger com-
mercial shopping center that restricted access
to the lot behind it. He also put together another
set of plans with another smaller building
designed as a gateway to the property behind
it. Tom’s next step took a straight face. He
marched into a meeting with the owner of the
property that was behind his property and
dropped both sets of plans down. He told the
owner (in a nice way) that he had a choice: He
could either buy his property for $320,000 so the
owner could develop it with the gateway, or if
the owner didn’t want to buy it, Tom was going
to develop it himself and restrict his access.
Tom was scared stiff at this point because he
knew that he didn’t have any way to close the
deal himself. Fortunately the owner agreed to
buy the property for $320,000 — and after they
went through the due diligence, the price
dropped down to $290,000. Tom walked away
with $130,000 in profit (after paying the land
owner his $160,000) and for two reasons: One
was that he found himself in a place in life
where he didn’t have a lot of choices. Either he
was going to go for it and make it in life, or he
wasn’t. The second reason that Tom was suc-
cessful is because he had guts. Guts boil down
to a willingness to move ahead even though
you’ve never done it before and even though
you’re scared to death.
 All maintenance and repairs
 The insurance on the property
 The real estate taxes
Bingo! It’s called passive income for a reason. After you get your office build-
ing rented out you can sit back and watch the cash flow come rolling in.
Heck, you can even hire a property management company to lease it out for
you. Then your only obligation is to sit on the beach.
Triple net leases are so called because the tenants in your office building pay
for all three categories of expenses. Tenants pay all three of these costs so
that the rent you get is a net amount that you don’t have to pay expenses out
of. So after the tenants pay for all the expenses and you pay the mortgage, the
rest goes into your pocket. It’s quite typical for a triple net lease to be 5 to 20
years in duration with rent increases every couple of years. But that can be a
disadvantage as well and here’s why: Let’s say that the lease is for ten years.
If your neighborhood experiences explosive growth over the next three to five
years, you won’t be able to charge higher rents or capitalize on what’s hap-
pening because you’re locked into a ten-year lease agreement. But overall,
triple net lease investments are very much sought after.
Retail centers
Retail centers, also known as shopping centers or malls, are at the heart of
most of the towns and cities in our country. These are the places where people
come to shop, eat, and meet with friends. And retail centers are one of the
commercial property asset types that you can invest in. Most investors like
retail centers because, like office and warehouse properties, many retail
properties are leased out on a long-term triple net lease basis where the ten-
ants pay for all the expenses. The upside to this as an investor is that your
rates of return won’t go down over time as the taxes and expenses go up. In
fact, as rents go up over time, your returns just keep getting better and better.
And as in most triple net lease agreements, rent increases are built into the
agreement with the tenant.
Hotels and resorts
This asset type isn’t our recommendation as the place to get started, but many
experienced investors have found it to be a fun and highly profitable area to
focus on. Of course, other investors have also lost their shirts (and some-
times their trousers too), so make sure that you know what you’re doing
before jumping in.
24 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
To get started in this niche, we suggest that you invest in the property and
then lease it out to another company that will operate the hotel or resort.
Why? After you go beyond simply owning the real estate and start running
the business, you’ve just stepped out of the wonderful world of commercial
real estate investing and entered into the world of running a business.
Land development
Land development is one of the most exciting types of commercial real estate.
However, it can also be an area that will teach you to some quick and painful
lessons if you jump in without knowing what you’re doing.
By taking some land that isn’t yet fit for building and taking it through the
approval process, you can dramatically increase the value. Commercial real
estate investors call this “taking it to the map.”
Remember that it also makes sense to start small and work your way up with
land development. For example, most of our Commercial Mentoring Program
clients get up to speed as quickly as possible by taking on initial land devel-
opment deals in the range of $500,000. Starting off small allows them to get
comfortable with the land development process before going out to raise mil-
lions of dollars.
When Stephen, one of our Commercial Mentoring Program coaches, was get-
ting started with land development, he found a heavily populated area with a
5-acre lot in his town that had not yet been developed. You may hear some
people refer to a piece of land like this as an infill project. Stephen’s goal was
to get the land under contract, and then he wanted to get the zoning changed
and everything else approved so that the land was ready to have houses built
on it.
Stephen was able to get a contract to purchase the land for $400,000. This
wasn’t too difficult to do because its zoning was agricultural which, by the
way, is less desirable than being zoned for residential. After the 5 acres was
taken through the entitlement process and was approved for building homes
on, it would be worth $1.2 million. If you’re thinking, “Wow, that sounds like
a good deal!” you just had a little taste of why so many people are excited
about land development.
With land development, the investor usually has a “free look” period — often
90 days or so — after the property is under contract to talk to the town plan-
ners and officials to see how likely approval is. To leverage and control the risk
on this, you can bring in an outside investor who can fund the down payment.
25Chapter 2: A Crash Course in Commercial Real Estate Investing
What You Need to Get Started
What’s the secret ingredient that allows someone to make it big in commercial
real estate? If we told you, how long would it take for you to jump up, bolt out
the door, and go find your first commercial deal? Well, you’re about to find
out, so put on your running shoes. The secret ingredient is none other than
desire. Yes, desire! If you were expecting some fancy formula, we’re really
sorry. But, in the end, it really boils down to how bad you want it.
If you have a strong enough desire, you’ll find a way. But, now that you know
the secret, you still need to be familiar with the tools, techniques, and guid-
ance that help you along the way. We explain them in the following sections.
No real estate license required
A lot of investors don’t have a real estate license, and they often wonder if
not having a license poses a problem. Our answer is no. Not having a license
will not hinder you nor has it hindered many of our successful friends and
clients who invest full time or part time.
Even one of your humble authors doesn’t currently have a license. The fact
is that as long as you’re a principal in the transaction, you don’t need to be
licensed. A principal is someone who buys property to make a profit. Agents
and brokers, on the other hand, are those who help an investor buy or sell, and
they’re the ones who get a commission as compensation. The duties they
perform require a license. As long you don’t receive compensation or repre-
sent yourself or someone else in the transaction, you don’t need one.
A couple of advantages that we can see for having a license are having access
to the multiple listing service (MLS), which allows you to see everything a
sales agent sees, and getting paid commissions when buying or selling your
own properties.
The disadvantage of having a license is that you’ll be under a lot more
scrutiny if one of your deals goes sour. You’re held to higher standard when
you’re licensed, and rightfully so. And that means your liability is greater.
Some people think that you can give someone who isn’t licensed a commission
as long as you don’t call it a commission. You may have heard things like “just
put it down as a consulting fee on the closing statement.” But, remember, if
you’re going to play, you need to play straight. Funny talk and alternative word-
ing is what gets people in trouble. And with so many opportunities to make
money playing by the rules, why would anyone want to bend them?
26 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
A few technical skills
Investing in commercial real estate requires a handful of skills. You don’t need
to understand differential equations or know how to rebuild a transmission.
However, the skills in the following sections are a must.
Easily meeting people and making new friends
Are you able to talk and connect with people easily? Do you like meeting new
friends and finding out more about how they view the world? If so, you’ll do
well at creating a stash of contacts. It’s important to network with the people
who will be investing in your commercial real estate deals because they hold
the “pot of gold.” People that you meet will eventually be your advisors,
investors, and partners, and they’ll send deals to you and connect you with
wealth-building resources.
If you’re the shy type, we’re betting that you’ll sooner or later get over your
shyness after you see all the money that’s being made by other investors who
love having a network of colleagues and friends. If you’re the shy, quiet type
like one of your coauthors, then you’ll have to gradually come out of your
shell.
Doing simple math
Can you look at a fax and properly enter some numbers into a simple spread-
sheet? And are you capable of using a calculator? These skills help you deter-
mine what a commercial property is worth, what you should pay for it, and
what your payday will be. If you need some pointers and guidance when it
comes to numbers, a course in business math is sure to get you up to speed.
Accounting and collecting
We believe that if you’re going to be in business, you’re going to need to be
comfortable asking other people to pay you the money that they owe you (in
rents). The neat part is that you can hire a property management company to
do all the collecting for you. And, if you’re starting small, you need to get a
good handle on accounting and other business essentials. Why? Because
throughout this book, we emphasize that investing in commercial real estate
is like investing in a real business where you have to pay bills, hire employ-
ees, deal with contractors, and know how to read simple financial reports.
Your coauthor Peter Conti started his first business more than 22 years ago.
One of the first books he read to bone up on accounting was Small Time
Operator by Bernard B. Kamoroff. To find out where to get this book, and to
discover other business-building tips, visit www.petercontiblog.com.
27Chapter 2: A Crash Course in Commercial Real Estate Investing
Myths and Questions about Investing
in Commercial Real Estate
Like any complicated business, commercial real estate investing has its share
of myths and questions. Knowing this information brings forth some valuable
truths that will rescue you from the trappings of confusion.
The following are some pretty common misconceptions about investing in
commercial real estate:
 You must start off in residential real estate to get into commercial real
estate. There’s no rule, rhyme, or reason stating that you must first invest
in residential real estate in order to make the leap into commercial real
estate investing. These fields are two different animals, two different
languages, and two different consumers. It’s like comparing apples to
oranges.
 Only the rich need apply. As you can probably imagine, this myth is
just that: a myth. It isn’t true that you have to be rich to get involved
with commercial real estate investing. You can be as creative in your
financing here as you can be when investing in homes.
If you don’t believe us, here’s an example: Donald, a mentoring student
of ours, recently purchased a 24-unit apartment building. The purchase
price was $750,000. The owner carried a second mortgage of $100,000
for Donald. That left him $50,000 for a down payment. Donald negotiated
$30,000 for repair credits at closing. That left him with an out-of-pocket
cost of $20,000, which he funded from a refinance from another property.
Donald proves you only need to be rich in desire and creativity.
 This game is only for big-time players. In commercial real estate it
doesn’t matter where you start, and it doesn’t matter if you only want
to devote part of your time to do it. Having a full-time job or being a
single-parent doesn’t matter either.
Coauthor Peter Harris started his career by buying small commercial
properties. His first was a cheap seven-unit apartment building. His
second was a small and quaint self-storage building used by the plumbers
in town. He did this part time while holding a full-time day job and rais-
ing a small family. It all started from there and grew to owning and
operating large community properties around the country.
 Commercial real estate investing is riskier. To this we say, “Compared
to what?” If you compare it to stocks, do you have control over the com-
panies you own stock in — in areas such as income, expense, debt, man-
agement, and insurance? We bet not. However, you do have these five
28 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
controls in commercial real estate investing. If you compare it to resi-
dential real estate investing, what happens if you rent out your single-
family home and the tenant moves out? What’s your monthly income
then? The answer: Nada. If, on the other hand, you own a 24-unit apart-
ment building and one tenant moves out, what’s your monthly income?
Answer: 23 paying tenants worth of rent! What’s more risky? We rest
our case.
 Commercial real estate is too complex for simple folks. Again, this isn’t
true. Remember when you got your new PDA cellphone? You had no idea
how to use it. It seemed too complicated, and it had entirely too many
buttons. But there was a manual to get you started. After that, through
repetition and practice, what seemed much like a puzzle is now fully
understood and appropriately used. Getting to know commercial real
estate investing is the same concept. You have quite a few things to
master, but it isn’t rocket science. We have taken students from knowing
nothing to making offers in a few weeks. They’re walking proof that it
can be done.
Real estate, like the rest of life, does have risks. If it didn’t, it probably wouldn’t
be as fun. And it surely wouldn’t pay off with the incredibly strong rates of
return that it does.
Timing the Commercial
Real Estate Market
Wouldn’t it be great if you could time the commercial real estate market pre-
cisely? For instance, what if you could predict what the office building market
would do five years from now in your town? Imagine if you had a process and
procedure for knowing the perfect time to buy in a certain market. Well, here’s
a secret: None of this exists. Sorry for bursting your bubble! But if we could
predict such things, we’d be living on our own islands off of Tahiti.
But here’s the good news. Remember the old adage, “Buy low and sell high?”
Believe it or not, this truly is how you get wealthy in real estate over time. It’s
a tried-and-true method. And here’s another secret (and this time we’re seri-
ous): A tool exists that helps you buy low and sell high in any market any-
where in the United States. That tool is the real estate cycle. And when you
pair this cycle with some knowledge of trends, you’re sure to be successful.
Pay close attention; we explain everything you need to know in the following
sections.
29Chapter 2: A Crash Course in Commercial Real Estate Investing
Knowing whether to buy, hold, or bottom-fish
Real estate cycles are like traffic lights. When you see a green light, you go.
When you see a yellow light, you go, but you proceed with caution. When you
see a red light, you stop. The trick, however, is knowing when you’re facing
green, yellow, or red lights. Here are some examples:
 A green light in commercial real estate investing may be spotted when you
notice upcoming job growth due to a factory expansion. Or when the
demand to build exceeds the supply of available properties. Most likely,
you’ll also see a lot of undeveloped land sales activity.
 A yellow light may be indicated by interest rates creeping up suddenly
and causing you to examine your costs of new money to borrow. Or it
could be when you see vacancies and “lease specials” increase. Or how
about reading in the local paper about the many struggling businesses
in an area? That has yellow light written all over it.
 A red light may be revealed by a halt in new construction, which may be
caused by overbuilding in the area. An increase in foreclosures and a
decrease in property values is a sure red light.
Making big money in commercial real estate is all about managing risks.
Understanding and gaining knowledge of real estate cycles helps you lower
your risk. Even though predicting real estate cycles is largely a game of luck,
it gets downright dangerous if you know nothing about the trends in the
market in which you’re investing. The following is an outline of the typical
commercial real estate cycle. This cycle can help you determine the best
time to buy, sell, or go bottom-fishing. Here are the phases of the cycle,
which are depicted in Figure 2-1:
 Expansion phase: During this phase, population increases, incomes rise,
employment is good, vacancies are decreasing, and rents are rising. New
buildings are planned. The human emotion here is excitement.
 Peak phase: This is the time to sell for maximum profit. This is a seller’s
market, and in this phase you see new building projects increasing and
bidding wars between investors. Listings are on the market for only a
short period of time. The human emotion here is sheer confidence.
 Contraction phase: Most likely, you’ll see a bunch of new projects on the
market now, and you may see evidence of overbuilding. Inflation is up,
interest rates are increasing, vacancy rates begin to creep up, and prices
begin to level. Foreclosures generally grow during this time. The human
emotion here ranges from mere concern and denial to utter shock.
 Recession phase: Real estate in this phase is becoming more difficult to
sell, and so properties stay on the market for longer periods of time.
Property values decrease, interest rates are high, and landlords are
competing for tenants because of overbuilding. Foreclosures are usually
rampant. The human emotion here is complete panic.
30 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
 Bottom phase: This is the best time to buy. However, this is the scariest
phase there is: Unemployment and inflation are high, and the demand
for apartments is decreasing. This phase separates the men from the
boys, the women from the girls, and the true investor from the stock
market refugee. The human emotion here is plain old depression for
most folks.
 Recovery phase: This phase is the breath of fresh air. The local economy
shows signs of life, vacancies decrease, rents level off and start to trickle
upward, speculation starts again, and money begins to flow back into
market. The human emotion here is pride, because you’ve waited out
the storm.
If you can recognize the cycles of your local economy, three obvious ques-
tions come to mind, and answering them will determine whether or not
you’re a successful investor:
 When is the best time to buy? The truthful answer is that it depends. If
you’re a smart investor, you should buy in the bottom or middle of the
expansion cycle. That way, you’re buying on trends and following the
market and other investors. You’ll likely feel safe because you’re follow-
ing what everyone else is doing.
 When is it the best time to sell? The answer is at the peak phase, right
at the top of the market. And the biggest problem with selling here is
knowing exactly where the top is. Here are two clues that have never
failed us yet: Watch the rents and vacancy rates separately. After rents
level off and become flat for three straight months or more, you’ve
reached the top. Or for another indication you’ve reached the top: After
vacancy rates are at a three- to five-year low, you’ve reached the top. It’s
that simple.
Peak Phase
Bottom Phase
E
x
p
a
n
s
i
o
n
P
h
a
s
e
C
o
n
t
r
a
ctionPhase
R
e
c
o
v
e
r
y
P
h
a
s
e
R e c e s s i o n
P
h
a
s
e
Figure 2-1:
The real
estate
cycle.
31Chapter 2: A Crash Course in Commercial Real Estate Investing
 When is it the best time to go bottom-fishing? If you aren’t a bold risk
taker, you may find this advice uncomfortable (so consider yourself fore-
warned!). Maverick investors buy at the bottom phase or at the front
end of the recovery phase. This is called “bottom-fishing” for deals. This
is where the big, big money is made. Maverick investors are brave and
courageous trendsetters. They’re usually the first investors in the worst
part of town, and they’re usually banking on the area to come back big
time. If they play their cards right, they come out on top, and if they
don’t, they simply walk away with an “aw, shucks.” Now that’s bravery!
Trends are your friends
True friends are always around when you call on them, and they won’t ever
let you down. And economic and demographic trends are your true friends in
commercial real estate investing. And best of all, these trends aren’t terribly
complex or difficult to determine. Here are the three trends that are plainly
fundamental when investing in any commercial real estate:
 Job growth: This trend makes perfect sense: Where the jobs are, people
are. And where the people are, demand exists for apartment rentals, office
space, and consumer goods. Job growth is an excellent indicator of a
healthy real estate market.
The best place to start in researching job growth is to contact your local
economic development department or chamber of commerce and ask
for historical and current job growth data.
 Development: This trend is all about supply and demand. After all, if a
shortage of office space or apartment housing is evident, you clearly
have a demand for new development. On the other hand, if you see that
the city is overbuilding, it’s an indication for you hold off and reassess.
 In the path of progress: It isn’t too difficult to spot this trend with your
own eyes. Whenever new building and development is either coming
your way or surrounds your property, you’re in the thankful path of eco-
nomic development. You can feel the “buzz” of prosperity around you.
32 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Chapter 3
Evaluating Commercial
Real Estate
In This Chapter
 Familiarizing yourself with important lingo
 Determining a property’s worth
 Examining a few analysis examples
 Valuing properties the professional way
 Surveying those things that create value
 Knowing the difference between a good deal and a bad one
There’s a myth going around town that you need to be an accountant with
an Ivy League degree to evaluate and analyze office buildings, retail cen-
ters, and apartment complexes. Don’t believe the hype. If you can count and
do some basic math, you’ll have no problem figuring out what your cash flow
and return on investment are for any piece of commercial property. In fact,
we guarantee that after you read this chapter and follow along with the exam-
ples, you’ll be able to figure out what a commercial property is worth just like
those sophisticated investor guys you see with their pocket protectors and
fancy spreadsheets.
This chapter explains what creates value in a property, shows you how to ana-
lyze an apartment building and a shopping center like a pro, explains how to
know a good deal from a bad deal, and provides invaluable guiding principles
of investment that will keep bad properties out of your portfolio — guaranteed.
Talking the Talk: Terms You Need to Know
Throughout this chapter, we use some terminology that you need to be famil-
iar with. Having these terms under your belt is crucial on two fronts:
 We presume you’re reading this book because you want to invest in com-
mercial real estate. Most likely, you’ll be using a real estate broker to help
you locate and close the deal. Real estate brokers know — and use —
most of the terms mentioned here. Gaining thorough understanding of
the terms levels the playing field. If you can speak their language, you
gain instant credibility and a relationship advantage over someone with-
out your knowledge and understanding.
 Just by increasing your word power, you gain increased confidence, which
enables you to make sound, efficient investment decisions, and gives you
an increased ability to hold your position, especially in negotiations.
Here are the words you need to know to navigate this chapter and talk the talk:
 Capitalization rate: Your capitalization rate is your net operating income
divided by the sales price. Also known as the cap rate, it’s the measure
of profitability of an investment. Cap rates tell you how much you’d
make on an investment if you paid all cash for it; financing and taxation
aren’t included:
Cap rate = net operating income ÷ sales price
 Cash flow: Your annual cash flow is net operating income minus debt
service. You can also figure monthly cash flow by dividing your annual
cash flow by 12:
Annual cash flow = net operating income – debt service
Monthly cash flow = annual cash flow ÷ 12
 Cash-on-cash return: To find your cash-on-cash return, divide your annual
cash flow by the down payment amount:
Cash-on-cash return = annual cash flow ÷ down payment
 Debt service: Debt service is calculated by multiplying your monthly
mortgage amount by 12 months:
Debt service = monthly mortgage amount × 12
 Effective gross income: You can find your effective gross income by sub-
tracting vacancy from gross income:
Effective gross income = income – (vacancy rate % × income)
 Gross income: Gross income is all of your income, including rents, laun-
dry or vending machine income, and late fees. It can be monthly or
annual.
 Net operating income (NOI): Your net operating income is your effective
gross income minus operating expenses:
Net operating income = effective gross income – operating
expenses
34 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
 Operating expenses: Your annual operating expenses of the property
typically include taxes, insurance, utilities, management fees, payroll,
landscaping, maintenance, supplies, and repairs. This category doesn’t
include mortgage payments or interest expense.
 Vacancy: A vacancy is any unit that’s left unoccupied and isn’t producing
income. Remember: A unit that’s vacated and rerented in the same
month isn’t considered a vacancy; it’s considered a turnover.
 Vacancy rate: Your vacancy rate is the number of vacancies divided by
the number of units:
Vacancy rate = number of vacancies ÷ number of units
Figuring Out What a Property Is Worth
When you first hear the word analysis, you may freak out — especially if you
aren’t a spreadsheet guru. We were intimidated by that word when we first
started out, too. But through the years, we’ve come to look at property analy-
sis more simply. The dictionary definition of the word analysis is “a separa-
tion of the whole into its component parts.” So, we break down any property
analysis into its component parts: income, expense, and debt. That’s it. We
take a look at the income information. Then we take a look at the expenses.
And finally, we add a loan or mortgage to the overall picture. We combine
them to come to a conclusion as to whether this deal makes money. Analysis
made simple.
The size or complexity of the deal doesn’t matter. Separate the deal into its
three component parts: Analyze and compile the income part; analyze and
compile the expense part; and analyze and compile the debt part. Any deal
can be broken up into these parts. When you have these parts, you can calcu-
late the net operating income, cash flow, cash-on-cash return, and cap rate.
It’s that simple.
Before you can figure out what a property is worth, you have to decide what
you really want from the property. You may want a stream of passive income
every month. Or you may want to hold a property long term to build your
wealth. Or you may want to buy it, rehab it, and sell it for a profit.
Not-so-obvious tips on analyzing
When you’re analyzing any property, keep the following in mind:
 Be leery of broker proformas. Proformas are brokers’ presentations of
data on the property that reflect a best-case scenario or even a perfect-
world situation. For example, even though the property may have eight
35Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
36 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
The technical meaning behind the numbersCap rate, cash flow, cash-on-cash return, and
net operating income are investment terms that
we show you how to use in this chapter, but
what do they really
mean to you as an investor?
Here’s the in-depth explanation:
 Capitalization rate: A cap rate is used as a
measure of a property’s performance with-
out considering the mortgage financing. If
you paid all cash for the investment, how
much money would it make? What’s the
return on your cash outlay? Cap rate is a
standard used industrywide, and it’s used
many different ways. For example, a high
cap rate usually typifies a higher risk invest-
ment and a low sales price. High cap rate
investments are typically found in poor, low-
income regions. A low cap rate usually typ-
ifies a Iower-risk investment and a high
sales price. Low cap rates are typically
found in middle-class to upper income
regions. Therefore, neighborhoods within
cities have “stamped” on them their
assigned cap rates.
That said, if you know what the NOI is, and
you know the given cap rate, you can esti-
mate what the sales price should be: sales
price = NOI ÷ cap rate. For example, if the
NOI is $57,230 and you want to make invest-
ments into 9 percent cap properties, the
price you’ll offer will be $635,889 (57,230 ÷ 9
percent). This is a good way to come up
with your first offer price — at the very
least, it’s a starting point.
 Cash flow: Positive cash flow is king, and
it’s one of your primary objectives in invest-
ing. Positive cash flow creates and main-
tains your investments’ momentum. When
purchasing an apartment building contain-
ing more than five units (considered com-
mercial), a bank’s basis for lending is the
property’s cash-flow capabilities. Your
credit score is a lower priority than the
cash-flow potential. An apartment building
with poor cash flow will almost always
appraise much lower than its comparables
for the area. Finally, positive cash flow
keeps you sleeping at night when property
values drop, because your bills and mort-
gage will still be paid.
 Cash-on-cash return: This is the velocity of
your money. In other words, how long does
it take for your down payment to come back
to you? If your down payment were $20,000,
how soon would your monthly cash flow
add up to $20,000? If your cash flow added
up to $20,000 in one year, your cash-on-
cash return would be 100 percent. If it takes
two years, your cash-on-cash would be 50
percent. If it takes three years, it would be
33 percent.
Commercial real estate investing can pro-
duce phenomenal returns. Cash-on-cash
returns of over 100 percent aren’t uncom-
mon. Now, if you were to go to your local
bank and deposit $20,000 into its most
aggressive CD investment for one to three
years, what type of cash-on-cash return
could you expect? Maybe 2 percent or 4
percent? You need to put an emphasis on
cash-on-cash return when you invest
simply because you need to know how fast
you can get your down payment back so
you can invest it again — and again.
 Net operating income (NOI): This term is
one of the most important ones when ana-
lyzing any deal. The net operating income is
the dollar amount that’s left over after you
collect all your income and pay out your
operating expenses. This amount is what’s
used to pay the mortgage with. And what’s
left after you pay the mortgage is what goes
into your pocket — your cash flow.
unrentable vacant units, the broker proforma will reflect those units as if
they were producing income. So, be careful in your analysis when you
see the word proforma. It isn’t how the property is actually performing.
Here’s the bottom line: Never make offers based on proforma data.
 Look deeper into the price. When analyzing apartments, always look at
sales price per door or price per unit. Get information on what local
apartments have sold for recently on a price-per-unit basis. For example,
if you know for a fact that the last three sales of apartments on the same
street sold for $45,000 per unit, then you know in your analysis that
paying $65,000 per unit may be too much. Knowing your price per unit
allows you to make quick decisions if the real estate agent is asking too
much or if you’re getting a steal of a deal.
 Not knowing expenses can cost you. One of the most understated and
misunderstood aspects of property analysis is expenses. Of course,
plugging actual and true operating expenses into your analysis isn’t
easy, because often that data isn’t available.
You’ll get your most reliable expense data from your property manager
or from a professional property manager who manages similar proper-
ties, not from the broker. Look at property expenses three different ways:
• Look at it in expenses per unit. Basically, divide the total expenses
by the number of units.
• Look at expenses as a percentage of the income. For example, as a
general rule, for apartment sizes that are greater than 50 units, we
take expenses to be at least 50 percent of the income.
• Look at expenses in the form of expenses per square foot. You get
this number by dividing the total expenses by the total square
footage of the living space.
 Don’t forget about the taxes. Be wary of property taxes stated in your
analysis or given to you by the broker. Brokers who present property
data rarely have the new property taxes in their spreadsheets. New taxes
refer to what your new tax bill would be upon transfer of ownership. For
37Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
Always keep your eye on the NOI and look
for ways to increase it by either raising
rents or reducing expenses. As the NOI
increases, so will the value of your property.
In fact, if you’re in an 8 percent cap neigh-
borhood, for every $100 that the NOI
increases, your property value will increase
by $1,250. Is that a good return for your
efforts or what?
You know that cap rate = NOI ÷ sales price,
but you can also flip the calculation: sales
price (or value) = NOI ÷ cap rate. Therefore,
you can figure a new value by dividing your
new NOI or increase of NOI by the going
cap rate. So $100 ÷ 8 percent = $1,250. Now,
if you can increase your NOI by $20,000,
your property value will have gone up by
$250,000 ($20,000 ÷ 8 percent = $250,000).
example, the current owner may have owned the property for 30 years
and his property taxes may have increased only slightly in those years.
But when you take over, the tax assessor will reassess the property
value, most times based on your sales price. So it’s quite possible that
your taxes may increase three to five times from what the previous owner
paid. Do your research by calling the property tax assessor’s office and
ask how property taxes are reassessed upon transfer of ownership.
 Verify your analysis. When we’re analyzing a deal in which the broker
feels that we can either raise the rents or decrease the expenses after we
take over, we always verify the broker’s projections. To verify whether
raising the rent is possible, we call properties in the area and do our
own rent survey; it only takes a few minutes to do and the information
is invaluable. To verify whether we can reduce expenses, we call our
property manager or contact another professional property manager
and run the expense scenario by him; easy to do — with results worth
their weight in gold.
 Get a thumbs up from your money guy or gal. When we get excited
about a deal during our analysis, we send it to our lender. He looks at it
from his point of view: Are the numbers good enough to get a good loan
on it? We may run our cash-flow projections based on a 15 percent down
payment, but he may spot something in the financials that may only
qualify the property for a 25 percent down payment. If your lender won’t
do this for you, get another lender.
 Keep in mind that concessions may penalize your future. When you’re
presented with information about the tenants, ask about any move-in
specials given to the current tenants. Those specials are called rent con-
cessions, and concessions are given when the market is weak and ten-
ants need to be enticed to move in or renew their leases. Usually, the
tenants are given one month rent free and it’s usually the 13th month
of a 12-month lease. The problem with this is that if you’re acquiring
the property, you won’t receive rent from that tenant on the 13th month
of the lease. And this gets worse if 50 percent of your tenants have
this concession, especially if their 13th month is the same month — this
means that 50 percent of the tenants will not be paying you rent that
month. Ouch!
Breakeven analysis
When analyzing property, we always want to know what our breakeven point
is. The breakeven point is the point at which occupancy income is equal to
our mortgage payments. In other words, if we know that our breakeven point
is 70 percent occupancy, we know we’re able to at least pay our expenses
plus mortgage without going into a negative cash-flow position. So for a
38 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
property that’s highly leveraged or has a large mortgage payment, its break-
even point is higher than usual — meaning, you have more risk if you’re
negative in cash flow.
To calculate your breakeven point, add up all your property’s operating
expenses and annual mortgage payments and divide by the gross potential
income. Gross potential income is what the income of the property would be if
it were 100 percent occupied with paying tenants. Here’s the equation:
Breakeven point (%) = operating expenses + annual mortgage payments ÷
gross potential income
Here’s a quick example: Let’s say your operating expenses are $75,000, your
annual mortgage payments are $35,000, and your gross potential income is
$200,000. To find your breakeven point percentage, here are the calculations:
$75,000 + $35,000 ÷ $200,000 = 55%
This means that at 55 percent occupancy, we’re breaking even when it comes
to cash flow (see Figure 3-1). Anything over 55 percent occupancy sends us
to cash-flow positive. Conversely, if we drop below 55 percent occupancy,
we’re in negative cash flow.
$200,000
gross
potential
$110,000
55%
Occupancy rate
0%100%
Total expenses +
annual mortgage
payments
Positive
cash flow
Negative
cash flow
Figure 3-1:
The
breakeven
point in this
example is
55 percent.
39Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
Establishing and following guiding principles
When you’re looking at any types of income properties and analyzing them,
you need to have a set of guiding principles for investment. We’ve established
some starting guiding principles for you. These principles will set the stan-
dards for your investments and help you set working goals moving forward.
Without them, you’ll wander aimlessly in the real estate investment game.
We’ve used these standards for years ourselves and with our clients, and we’ve
saved many people, including ourselves, from passing up that great once-in-a-
lifetime deal or buying that deal that really stunk. Your guiding principles are
basically fail-safe measures to guide you into cash-flowing, wealth-building
investments and to keep you out of negative cash-flowing ones.
Here are our guiding principles:
 Make sure that you have a positive cash flow. We believe that having
positive cash flow keeps your momentum going. Positive cash flow
allows you to leave your day job if that’s your goal. Positive cash
flow allows you to invest more money, and it opens doors for the next
investment to flow right in.
 Have a cash-on-cash return of 10 percent or greater. A good cash-on-
cash return puts velocity on your money. It keeps your cash flow posi-
tive when you have those not-so-good months. A good cash-on-cash
return allows you to brag to your investor buddies about what a well-run
property you have.
 Have a cap rate of 8 percent or greater. A great cap rate means your
NOI is healthy. A healthy NOI is stable and growing, which means
your property value is doing the same. A great cap rate also gets you
the best loan terms.
These are only starting guiding principles of investment. You have to start
someplace, right? You may be thinking, “But you won’t find any 8 caps in my
city!” And you may even believe that it’s impossible to find double-digit cash-
on-cash returns. Or you may be convinced that it’s impossible to cash flow
positively unless you put down 50 percent. Well, our reply to that type of
thinking is this: Sooner or later, you’ll be convinced and support the theory
that at any one time, there are great deals out there waiting for you.
Running the Numbers on Some Properties
Now that you have some basic commercial property investment terms and
principles under your belt, we want to walk you through analyzing two prop-
erties. This is where it gets fun!
40 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Be sure to follow these tips when analyzing your own retail property deal:
 Look at the price per square foot. When analyzing retail, one of the first
things we look at is the price per square foot. It’s an easy way to com-
pare apples to apples and oranges to oranges. It’s also a way to get a
reality check to see if you’re paying too much for the property compared
to other recent sales.
 Be conservative in your number crunching. What you’ll find when you
own a few retail centers is that incomes given to you by either the broker
or seller are overstated and expenses are understated. Really take a hard
look at each item given and then take a conservative approach when run-
ning your numbers.
 Replace your reserves. One of the most overlooked expenses when ana-
lyzing retail is the replacement reserve. Replacement reserve is an amount
set aside every month to pay for property items that wear out and need
to be replaced, such as roofs, siding, sidewalks, parking lots, heating/
air-conditioning equipment, and so on. When these items come up for
repair or replacement three to five years after you take ownership, the
money has to come from somewhere — refinancing, your pockets, your
partner’s pockets, or a reserve account you cleverly set up ahead of time.
 Look at the parking ratio. The parking ratio for your retail center is
more important than you think. The standard to begin with is four
spaces per 1,000 square feet. If you don’t have enough parking, it can
create a problem down the road.
 Consider class. All commercial properties fall under classifications — A,
B, C, or maybe even D. Class A properties are newer, have top-of-the-line
features, are in the best locations, and attract the highest-quality tenants.
As you go into the lower classes, location, age, and construction become
less desirable. Pay attention to what class property you’re evaluating
because as classes differ, so do location, price, rent, and occupancy.
 Match rent rolls to estoppels. The rent roll is a list of tenant names
showing what they pay in rent, in addition to when the lease agreement
expires. Estoppels are letters sent to the tenant by someone other than
the landlord to confirm in writing the terms of the lease, including rent
amount, lease expirations, and any other options they have agreed on.
Estoppels are used because the tenant may not be paying the landlord in
rent what she has agreed to for whatever reason, or the landlord may
have made a side agreement with the tenant that can’t be confirmed or
enforced by new owners. When the tenant-signed estoppels are received,
you can compare them to the rent rolls and actual signed leases for
income verification.
 Check in with your money guy or gal early. Before digging too deep
into your analysis, call up your lender buddy and present the rent roll,
the type of tenants, and financials to her. Have the lender review this
41Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
deal from her perspective. Some lenders may not like certain businesses.
For example, securing a loan for a shopping center with a dry cleaner or
automotive repair place has been more difficult lately because of envi-
ronmental concerns, and movie theater chains and video stores chains
have come under scrutiny because of recent national bankruptcies.
Analyzing an apartment deal
Here’s the deal: Cool Heights Apartments is offered at $550,000. It’s a well-
maintained 20-unit (all 2-bed/1-bath) complex located in an up-and-coming
area one block from City Hall. Each unit is rented for $525 per month and the
building is currently 100 percent occupied. The owner has spent over $100,000
in rehab and upgrades in the last 12 months. All new furnaces and air condi-
tioners were installed. The owner is retiring to Florida with his family, and
that’s his reason for selling. Professional property management is in place
and the building is managed very well. It has a good rental history. Covered
parking is included. Tenants are responsible for their own electric and heat
utility bills; the owner pays for the property’s water and garbage removal.
The total building square footage is 22,160 square feet.
The following financial data was given for yearly operating expenses:
 Insurance: $4,500
 Real estate taxes: $9,610
 Maintenance: $14,900
 Electrical (common area): $1,300
 Water/sewer: $9,400
 Property management (5 percent): $6,210
 Garbage removal: $1,150
 Supplies: $2,700
 Reserves: $6,000
 Accounting: $1,400
So, adding that up, the total operating expenses are $57,170.
Now, separate this whole deal into its three simple components of income,
expenses, and debt. Here’s the income breakdown:
Gross income = $525 × 20 units × 12 months = $126,000 per year
Vacancy rate = $126,000 per year × 10 percent (assumption) = $12,600
Effective gross income = $126,000 – $12,600 = $113,400 per year
42 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Here’s the expense breakdown:
Total operating expenses = $57,170
To figure out the debt breakdown, we’re going to assume that the interest
rate is 6.5 percent today with a 30-year amortization period:
Asking price = $550,000
Down payment = 20 percent of asking price, which is $110,000
Loan amount (principal) = $550,000 – $110,000 = $440,000
Loan payment per month = $2,781 (we used a mortgage calculator for this
figure)
Loan payments per year (debt service) = $2,781 × 12 months = $33,372
Now, you have everything you need to figure out whether this deal makes
money or not, using these four easy steps:
1. Calculate the net operating income (NOI).
Net operating income = effective gross income – operating expenses
$113,400 – $57,170 = $56,230
2. Calculate the annual cash flow.
Annual cash flow = net operating income – debt service
$56,230 – $33,372 = $22,858
3. Calculate the cash-on-cash return.
Cash-on-cash return = annual cash flow ÷ down payment
$22,858 ÷ $110,000 = 21 percent
4. Calculate the cap rate.
Cap rate = net operating income ÷ sales price
$56,230 ÷ $550,000 = 10.2 percent
So, in a nutshell, you’re putting down $110,000 to earn $22,858 per year in
cash flow, or approximately 21 percent return on your $110,000. That’s pretty
darn good.
Analyzing a retail shopping center
One of the most important items to understand when analyzing retail invest-
ments is the lease. A lease is a written legal agreement between the landlord
(called the lessor) and the tenant (called the lessee) that establishes how
43Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
much the tenant will pay in rent; how long the tenant is legally committed to
stay; any additional payments by the tenant for taxes, insurance, or mainte-
nance; rent increases; renewal clauses and options; and all rights, privileges,
and responsibilities of the tenant and landlord.
Following are types of leases you’ll run into in the course of looking into
investing in retail shopping centers. Each has its own wrinkles and stipula-
tions, so pay attention to the small differences:
 Gross lease: The landlord agrees to pay all operating expenses and
charges the tenant a rent that’s over and above the operating expenses.
The types of expenses covered include taxes, insurance, management,
maintenance, and any other costs associated with operating the property.
 Modified gross lease: This lease is slightly different from the standard
gross lease in that some of the operating expenses — such as mainte-
nance, insurance, or utilities — aren’t paid for by the landlord and are
passed on to the tenant. These expenses are called pass-through expenses
because they’re passed through to the tenant. Many office-type buildings
use a modified gross lease.
 Net lease: In a net lease, the tenants pay the operating expenses of the
property and the landlord gets to net a certain amount every month by
charging rent over and above the total operating expenses. This lease is
favorable in many ways: It’s favorable to the landlord because she isn’t
responsible for any operational expenses of the property. It’s favorable
to the tenant because he gets to fix up his store as he sees fit and do his
own maintenance and cleaning. Net leases are typically customized to fit
tenant needs.
This type of lease is used mainly by retailers. The landlord takes care
of the common area maintenance, and the expense of that is spread
among the tenants and billed back to them.
There are several different levels and types of net leases:
• Single net lease (N): In a single net lease, the tenant agrees to pay
property taxes. The landlord pays for all other expenses in the
operation.
• Double net lease (NN): In a double net lease, the tenant agrees to
pay property taxes and insurance. The landlord pays for all other
expenses in the operation.
• Triple net lease (NNN): A triple net lease is most favorable for land-
lords and is one of the most popular today. The tenants agree to
pay the landlord rent plus all other property-related expenses
including taxes, insurance, and maintenance. The landlord gets a
true net payment. Banks, fast-food restaurants, and anchor tenants
typically use triple net leases.
44 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Anchor tenants are major tenants, usually the tenant occupying
the most space. Anchor tenants are critical in giving value and
security to a retail shopping center investor. Their signs are usu-
ally the largest and stand out. Major retail chain stores typically
are anchor tenants and are called so because they attract other
businesses to the shopping center location. They “anchor” the
shopping center so to speak.
A common clause used in net leases is the expense stop clause, which
states that any amount over a certain fixed expense will be charged to
the tenant. The fixed expense is a dollar amount agreed on by the tenant
and landlord.
A great income generator for landlords is to build into the lease a clause
called percentage of sales. With this clause, the landlord gets an additional
payment from the tenant if and when the tenant reaches a certain sales
volume or profitability. For example, say a burger restaurant has agreed to
pay an additional 3 percent of its gross sales after its sales reach a certain
level. The landlord would be paid the 3 percent in addition to the normal
lease payment.
Even though retail leases are long term — say, 5 to 15 years in length — it’s
common for leases to have rental increases or rent escalations in the middle
of the leasing years. For example, you could have a rent escalation of 5 per-
cent once every five years until the lease expires.
Now that you have all that info on leases down, it’s time to analyze a deal.
Here’s the deal: Kimo’s Landing, a 36,000-square-foot retail center anchored
by a major chain pharmacy is in the center of town, right in the path of
progress. It’s on 3 acres of land. The retail center is composed of eight stores
of various types, ranging from a bagel shop to a U.S. post office. Table 3-1
provides the square footage and yearly rent of each unit.
Table 3-1 Square Footage and Yearly Rent for Kimo’s Landing
Lessees
Square Footage Rent Per Square Foot Yearly Rent
Pharmacy 10,000 $10 $100,000
Bank 8,000 $8 $64,000
Bagel shop 1,500 $5 $7,500
Express photo shop 1,500 $5 $7,500
Electronics shop 1,000 $6 $6,000
Beauty store 2,000 $6 $12,000
(continued)
45Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
Table 3-1
(continued)
Lessees
Square Footage Rent Per Square Foot Yearly Rent
Clothing store 6,000 $7 $42,000
U.S. post office 6,000 $8 $48,000
Total 36,000 — $287,000
All leases are triple net (NNN), with the owner charging the tenants for
common area maintenance (CAM). The CAM expense for the owner is $3,000
per month and includes landscaping, parking lot, hallways, and restrooms.
Now, you need to separate this whole deal into its three simple components
of income, expenses, and debt. Here’s the income breakdown:
Gross income = $287,000
For the expense breakdown, because this is a triple net lease, the tenants pay
all property operating expenses. The landlord takes care of all common area
maintenance expenses, and then bills back to the tenants. But this is billed
back to and divided among the tenants. So, there’s no hard expense to
use here.
To figure the debt breakdown, you need to figure out what the yearly loan
payments would be. We’re going to assume that the interest rate is 6.5 per-
cent today with a 30-year amortization period:
Asking price = $3,100,000
Down payment = 20 percent of asking price, which is $620,000
Loan amount (principal) = $3,100,000 – $620,000 = $2,480,000
Loan payment per month = $15,675 (we used a mortgage calculator for
this figure)
Loan payments per year (debt service) = $15,675 × 12 months = $188,100
Now, you have everything you need to figure out whether this deal makes
money, using these four easy steps:
1. Calculate the net operating income (NOI).
Net operating income = effective gross income – operating expenses
$287,000 – $0 = $287,000
2. Calculate the cash flow.
Annual cash flow = net operating income – debt service
46 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
$287,000 – $188,100 = $98,900
3. Calculate the cash-on-cash return.
Cash-on-cash return = annual cash flow ÷ down payment
$98,900 ÷ $620,000 = 16 percent
4. Calculate the cap rate.
Cap rate = net operating income ÷ sales price
$287,000 ÷ $3,100,000 = 9.3 percent
A pretty decent return on your investment that’s pretty hands-off compared
to being involved with managing a property every day.
The Professional Approach
to Valuing Properties
Professional property evaluators, commonly called real estate appraisers,
have the awesome responsibility of estimating or giving an opinion of a value
on commercial properties. It makes sense for you to understand how apprais-
ers value commercial real estate so you can apply their techniques to our
methods of estimating value.
Approach #1: Comparable sales
The first and easiest method in commercial property evaluation is called the
comparable sales approach. Remember when you bought your first house and
the bank had an appraiser go out and give the property a value that you
hoped at least equaled your purchase price? Well, the same applies here for
commercial property. The commercial appraiser goes out and compares
prices of recently sold local properties that are similar in form and function
to the property he’s appraising. The comparison will produce an average
price and that price is what your property will be valued at. But in commer-
cial comparables, instead of looking at just overall sales price, the sales price
per square foot of the building is also considered one of the main factors.
Here’s a quick example:
Property A, a 10,000-square-foot building, sold last spring for $65 per
square foot. Doing the simple math to compute the sales price, you calcu-
late 10,000 square feet × $65 per square foot = $650,000.
47Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
Property B, a 9,000-square-foot building, sold three months ago for $68
per square foot. Again, doing the math, 9,000 square feet × $68 per square
foot = $712,000.
Property C, the property you want to figure a price for, is similar to
Property A and Property B and is 11,000 square feet in size. If you
average out the price per square foot on both Property A and Property B,
the average comes out to $66.50 per square foot. Use that price per square
foot as your number to evaluate Property C. Doing the math, you get
11,000 square feet × $66.50 = $731,500 as the value for Property C.
When attempting to value apartment complexes, price per unit or price per
door is used more often than price per square foot. Much like the preceding
example, price per unit is calculated from previous apartment sales. When
you have an average of price per unit for several complexes, you can esti-
mate a value of another complex.
Even though the comparable sales approach is the easiest method for figur-
ing out a value for a commercial property, we’ve run into two problems when
using this approach:
 When a market isn’t stabilized, or values go up or down, this can nullify
the use of the comparable sales approach.
 In some small-town markets, there are no comparable sales because of
the lack of overall sales.
Approach #2: Income
When you get out into the real world of commercial real estate, you’ll discover
that commercial properties are chiefly valued by the amount of income they
bring in. Actually, to be more precise, it’s the net operating income that’s
most important.
When accurate financial and operating data are available on the property, the
income approach of valuing a property can be used. This approach is based
on the capitalization rate being calculated for a property. To calculate the cap
rate, you must know the property’s net operating income and sales price.
After you calculate the cap rate of a property, the next step is to compare the
cap rate to similar properties’ cap rates. Every area in your city that has com-
mercial properties has a cap rate stamped on it. Your job is to find those
other properties and their cap rates and get the average. That average cap
rate percentage is what you use in calculating property value when you know
the net operating income.
48 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Here’s an example to follow: Let’s say you want to value a 50-unit apartment
building. You’ve calculated the net operating income to be $180,000. Your
research from previous apartment sales tells you that the going cap rate for
the neighborhood in which the property is located is 8 percent. Now, if you
know the net operating income and the cap rate, you can figure out the sales
price. Here’s how:
Cap rate = net operating income ÷ sale price
8 percent = $180,000 ÷ sale price
Sale price = 180,000 ÷ 8 percent = $2,250,000
Therefore, the property should be valued at or estimated to be $2,225,000,
based on average cap rates in the area and the property’s net operating
income.
Every investor who wants to find out how to estimate values of income-
producing properties should know and understand the basics of the
income approach. It’s an indispensable tool that’s very commonly used
by investors, real estate agents, and lenders.
Approach #3: Cost to replace the property
The third approach to figuring out what a property is worth is the cost
approach, which is seldom used these days by appraisers. The theory behind
it is this: The value of a property is whatever it costs to construct a new one
in addition to the cost of the land.
The cost approach is best when the property is new or almost new. For older
properties, this approach isn’t used because of several issues — primarily,
depreciation.
To apply the cost approach in valuing a building, you must first figure out
what the value of its land would be. This is typically done via a sales compari-
son approach (see the section “Approach #1: Comparable sales,” earlier in
this chapter). Then you have to determine what it will cost to construct,
reproduce, or replace the building in question as if you were doing it from
scratch. Be sure to allow for accrued depreciation and obsolescence of the
building.
You end up with a property value calculation of:
Land value + building cost – depreciation = estimated property value
49Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
Understanding What Creates Value
What is it that really creates value in commercial real estate? Well, in residen-
tial real estate, such as single-family homes, what creates value is location.
Location, location, location is the saying that you always hear. The most
expensive homes are in the best of neighborhoods, right? But location isn’t
the only factor that creates value in commercial real estate. In fact, there are
two factors that are actually more important than location: use and the lease.
We cover these in the following sections.
Use: How the property is used gives value
How a property is used is probably the most important factor in understand-
ing values in commercial real estate. Here’s why: Let’s say that you have a
5-acre lot directly across the street from a brand-new luxury apartment com-
plex that has a three-month waiting list for new tenants. Common sense says
that you should develop it into another apartment complex because there’s
great demand. It appears big money awaits you.
But upon further research, you find out that the city says that your 5-acre lot
can only be used for agricultural purposes. Where is there greater investment
value — in a high-rent luxury apartment complex or a tomato farm? Exactly —
the luxury apartment complex! Therefore, how a property can be used deter-
mines its value.
How a piece of land or property can be used is, for the most part, controlled
by the city’s local planning department. The planning department keeps con-
trol of this through zoning. Zoning specifies which type of property may be
built in specific areas. Zoning is a governmental system in regulating land use
and is typically master planned by the city. In the preceding example, the city
has zoned that particular piece of land, the 5 acres, as agricultural use. This
means that it can only be used for agricultural purposes and can’t be used to
build apartments, retail centers, office buildings, or industrial parks. The 5
acres would achieve its highest investment value if it were zoned for apart-
ments or even retail — but the planning department may have other develop-
ment plans for the area.
Here’s a quick example showing how use can have a significant impact on
property value: Let’s say you go ahead and decide to farm and grow tomatoes
on your 5 acres. You can produce a thousand 25-pound cartons of tomatoes
per 5 acres. You can sell them for $2 per pound, which produces an income
of $50,000. After you deduct a production cost of 30 percent, you’re left with
$35,000 of income over 5 acres. So, you end up with $7,000 per acre. If you
were to capitalize that at 8 percent, here’s what it would look like: $7,000 ÷ 8
percent = $87,500 per acre. And here’s how to get the estimated value over
the 5 acres: 5 acres × $87,500 = $437,500.
50 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Now, let’s say that the 5 acres was approved for use as an apartment building.
On your 5-acre lot, you can fit 2 acres of living space. Each acre is 43,560
square feet. So, 2 acres equals 87,120 total square feet of living space. It’s
reasonable to say that apartment sales are going for $50 per square foot.
Therefore, 87,120 square feet × $50 per square foot = $4,356,000, which is
the estimated value for the apartment building.
Wow, how exciting! This is what commercial real estate is all about — finding
opportunity, creating a product that betters humankind, and then reaping the
rewards. The challenge in front of you in this example is to get the zoning
changed on the 5 acres to allow an apartment building. To find out more on
zoning and land development, flip to Chapter 15.
Leases: As the lease goes, so goes the value
A lease is a written legal agreement between the lessor (the landlord) and the
lessee (the tenant) whereby the lessee compensates the lessor (by paying
rent) for the use of the property for a specific time period. There’s no such
thing as a typical commercial lease, but here are a few main differences
between a lease for a commercial property and a residential property (an
apartment unit, for example):
 A commercial lease is a lot tougher to get out of than a residential lease.
 A commercial lease tends to last a lot longer, sometimes for 20 years.
 Because no standard commercial lease exists, parties can be as flexible
and creative as they want.
 A commercial lease has significantly less consumer protection (for the
tenant) than a residential lease does.
When you buy a commercial property, you’re buying the leases, and the prop-
erty comes for free. That’s how important the actual lease is to the value of
the property. Simply put, if the lease is weak, your property value is weak.
And conversely, if the property has a strong lease, the property value is going
to be strong.
As you may imagine, leases are the number-one killer of deals. They’re the
lifelines of income to the property. If the lifeline is tethered and weak, then
your income is weak as well. And who wants to invest big dollars in a not-so-
sure income stream? The lender won’t and you shouldn’t either. In fact, if a
business in one of the shopping center’s stores has a lease agreement with
one year left, the income from that store isn’t even counted by the lender
when making a loan decision — maybe you shouldn’t count it in your initial
analysis either.
Here’s how you, the investor, or a lender would look at a property’s lease in
connection to the value it creates for the property: Say you’ve been sent a
51Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
great deal from your broker. It’s for a 5,000-square-foot, single-tenant property
that’s occupied by the successful family-run and family-owned Grandma’s
Corner Groceries. The rent is $7 per square foot, or $35,000 per year and that
includes taxes, insurance, and maintenance. The current lease has five years
remaining.
Say also that you’ve been sent another deal for a 5,000-square-foot property
that has a Starbucks as its tenant. Starbucks pays $6 per square foot, or
$30,000 per year, which also includes taxes, insurance, and maintenance.
The current lease has five years remaining.
The question is this: Which is the better investment? Grandma’s Corner
Groceries or Starbucks? Which one is a lower risk? Which one allows you to
predict that you’ll be paid every month for the next five years? Which one is
less likely to go out of business? Which one will allow you to sleep at night
knowing that your investment dollars are in good hands?
Starbucks is the obvious answer, even though you have higher income on the
grocery store. Starbucks is a highly rated company and is publicly traded on
the NASDAQ. Its financials are open to the public. It has a responsibility to its
shareholders to make a profit. Even if it decides to close up shop there and
abandon the property, it must make good on the lease and pay the lease off
in its entirety. On the other hand, Grandma’s Corner Groceries is backed by
who knows what. If it goes out of business for some reason — fire, theft,
infighting — your options for financial recourse don’t favor your breaking
even. So, the property with the Starbucks lease will command a greater value
because of its lower risk.
Here are a handful of things to watch for when reviewing a lease agreement
as an investor:
 Rent amount
 Lease term or how long the lease is for
 Additional costs that the landlord and tenant may be responsible for
 Subleasing
 Whether you need to do any improvements to the property before you
move in
 How much your security deposit is to move in and how you ensure get-
ting it back after your lease expires and you move out
Read the leases thoroughly many times so that you don’t miss a thing. If you
don’t believe us, check out this example about our friend who missed a very
important clause in the lease: He purchased a shopping center and his largest
tenant, which took up one-third of the total space, had a clause in the lease
that said if the store didn’t produce $600,000 in gross sales per year, it could
back out of the lease. Two years into the lease, the sales volume dropped
below $600,000 and the tenant opted out of the lease.
52 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Location: The unchangeable factor
As we mention earlier, location is a key factor in understanding what creates
value in commercial real estate. How does location create value? One way is
job growth. If a city has gone out of its way to attract and entice employers to
open up businesses there, that causes economic growth to occur. And eco-
nomic growth affects real estate value in a positive way, just as a city with
negative economic growth causes real estate values to fall.
Certain neighborhoods or districts are better bets than others for commer-
cial real estate, especially if they’re in the path of progress (see Chapter 15
for more on locating the path to progress in your city). New construction,
revitalization, and gentrification are all associated with instilling new life into
a neighborhood or district. If you witness an area undergoing any of these,
you can bet the real estate values there will be impacted positively.
The success of a shopping center, for example, largely depends on its loca-
tion. You can fix parking lots and physical appearance, but you can’t fix poor
location. A great location combined with well-selected stores equals long-
term success and a superb investment.
Differentiating a Good
Deal from a Bad Deal
What’s a good deal? And how do you define a bad deal? Well, unfortunately,
the answers can be a bit squishy. After all, what’s good for us may be bad for
you, and vice versa. It really depends on the purpose of your investment buys.
The purpose behind your investment could be for cash flow, long-term hold,
or short-term hold. In this section, we examine all three.
Cash-flow investors
Cash-flow investors invest to produce cash-in-your-pocket-every-month
income. For the cash-flow investor, a good deal would be:
 A 95 percent to 100 percent occupied, well-maintained apartment com-
plex with excellent professional property management
 An apartment complex that has a breakeven occupancy point of 70 per-
cent or less
 A retail shopping center with a highly rated, credited tenant on a ten-
year triple net lease with rent escalations every year
53Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
 A multistory office building that you own debt free and that’s filled with
great long-term tenants
For the cash-flow investor, a bad deal would be:
 Any type of property with lots of deferred maintenance
 Any property that’s so highly leveraged with debt that if 10 percent of
the tenants moved out, you’d be in a negative cash flow situation
 An apartment complex in an apartment-filled neighborhood in a soft
rental market
Long-term investors
Long-term investors hold their investments over time and build wealth
through appreciation and paying down the loan principal.
For the long-term investor, a good deal would be:
 A shopping center with a long-term triple net lease in a medium-sized
town with an aggressive economy
 An apartment complex built in the path of progress of new construction
and job growth
 Any commercial investment in an area that has had decreasing cap rates
for the past few years
For the long-term investor, a bad deal would be:
 Overpaying in an area where cap rates are increasing
 Buying in an area where the economy has been sustained by one large
employer
 An office building that’s functionally obsolete today and new building
projects are underway nearby
Short-term investors
Short-term investors hold their investments two years or less. Their goal is to
buy, fix up, stabilize, and sell.
For the short-term investor, a good deal would be:
54 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
 Buying at a really low price by using ultraconservative resale figures
 Acquiring an “easy-fix” rehab property with little down payment and
owner financing in a seller’s market
For the short-term investor, a bad deal would be:
 Buying a rehab in a market that starts to decline right after your
purchase
 Not doing a thorough enough analysis and due diligence and finding out
that your rehab budget is actually off by double the amount
 Assuming a loan with a large prepay (early payoff) penalty over the next
few years
55Chapter 3: Evaluating Commercial Real Estate
Supply and demand: Timing the market just right
When demand is high for certain commercial
real estate, value goes up. Your job as the
investor is to find out why. Why is demand high?
What’s driving the demand? Is it the influx of
companies moving in or expanding in the area?
Is it the explosion of retail shopping due to
the influx of young families and professionals?
Find out what’s going on.
See where you are in the real estate cycle. Are
you in a rising market, at the top of the market, or
in a down market? If you’re in a rising market,
values will increase. Ride it to the top, and then
make a decision to sell or wait for the inevitable
downward trend. The downward trend is
absolutely okay if the property sustains itself and
cash flows well. If you find yourself on the down-
ward trend, get out before you lose too much
value or weather the storm and think long term.
Keep in mind that supply and demand come in
cycles. And because of this, property values will
be cyclical as well. (Study the real estate cycle
in Chapter 2 — it will help you see where your
market is currently and how values are affected
by supply-and-demand situations.) How can you
time the market to ride the wave of increasing
value? Here’s how:
 Watch prices. If the downward trend has
stopped, you’ve reached bottom or almost
bottom. It’s time to buy and ride the wave
back up.
 Watch job reports. When job growth is pos-
itive, it’s time to ride the wave.
 Watch investors. When you see other
investors come in and start investing heav-
ily early, it’s time to jump in with them.
However, there are pitfalls to valuing the market
by watching rising prices, positive job growth,
and outside investors. Here are some of those
pitfalls:
 You waited too long. Determining exactly
when the upward wave starts isn’t easy. If
you wait for signs that are too obvious, you
can miss the wave entirely.
 You misjudged the wave. What you thought
was a wave, was just a ripple. Oops.
 You got greedy. People tend to get overly
confident when the market just keeps going
up and up and up. But what goes up must
come down at some point. So, if you wait
too long, you may miss your run at the profits.
56 Part I: Getting to Know Commercial Real Estate Investing
Part II
Getting Started
Making Deals
In this part . . .
Here we present the four essential steps to every
commercial deal you put together. Then we jump
into some serious deal making by sharing with you our
Instant Offer System, which shows you how to make suc-
cessful offers. And because all big commercial deals need
to be checked out before you make the final move to buy
them, you need to understand how to use due diligence
and the closing process to uncover hidden problems,
negotiate prices down, or determine when the best deal
for you is not to buy. We end this part by showing you
how to close a deal.
Chapter 4
On Your Mark, Get
Set, Go Find Deals
In This Chapter
 Knowing how to find great deals
 Surveying the many ways to find leads
 Determining where to look for deals
 Networking your way to great deals
So you want to know where you can find bargain commercial properties.
Well, you’ve come to the right place. In this chapter, we discuss just that:
finding deals in the commercial world. By connecting and getting to know
some of the right people and players, you can pull in some pretty big fish
(and maybe find a commercial deal or two!). We share with you useful tools
that may come in handy in your search. We tell you who to talk to, where to
go, and why you should go there. Always buying in your own town can get
boring and costly, so we also talk about how to go big-time and invest in com-
mercial properties in other cities across the country.
Discovering the Secret to
Finding Great Deals
Let’s face it: Finding great commercial properties is difficult to do. So what’s
the big secret to being successful? The secret is that there is no secret. Finding
great commercial deals is a matter of having multiple fishing lines in the
water and being willing to put in the work upfront, knowing the real payoff
comes down the road when you find that incredible “once-in-a lifetime” deal.
It’s also a matter of performing a variety of different tasks, including creating
relationships, sending out mailings, and focusing on the ponds that are most
likely to have the big fish — those profitable, cash-flowing commercial prop-
erties that you’re trolling for.
To get the hang of all this, you need to spend time with other successful com-
mercial investors. The fastest way that you can discover what’s possible is by
being in a group of people who are finding and investing in commercial prop-
erties that make sense. That way, when you run into the sellers who want too
much, a part of you will get angry and say, “Wait a minute. There must be a
way to have this commercial property purchase work. I know from watching
other in my peer group that there are great deals out there.”
One of the most important things you need to do is to know and believe
through to the core of your being that you can find great commercial deals.
You need a burning passion and unstoppable desire to overcome and blast
through any obstacles that inevitably get in your way (no matter how impos-
sible it may seem). It’s incredibly important to have the mind-set that great
commercial properties will come into your life because of the actions you
take each and every day.
If this sounds like it’s too much to overcome, rest assured. We’re here to lay
out a proven path to those big streams of potential deals. When combined
with your powerful determination, our suggested path will allow you to catch
those big fish.
Defining your property search
What type of properties are you looking for? You need to think through your
ultimate goals to make sure that you’re fishing in the right ponds. It doesn’t
make sense, for example, to be looking at only Class A properties (the mostly
new, beautiful properties in really nice areas) if you want to get your career
started by leveraging your way into a property. Oftentimes it’s the owners of
Class C or D properties who are most open to using creative financing.
Many beginning commercial investors typically start out looking for commer-
cial multiunit properties with anywhere from 5 to 50 units. Creative financing,
including nothing-down deals, is possible in this market segment because it
can be difficult for owners to get conventional financing. The reason is
because lenders who make loans on commercial properties would much
rather put together a loan on a 300-unit apartment building than they would
on a 20-unit apartment building. It’s basically the same amount of work, and
the lender makes much more on the larger property.
Aim to know enough about office buildings, small shopping and retail centers,
and other types of commercial properties so that you can quickly analyze any
deal you run across, even if it isn’t exactly the type of commercial property
that you’re looking for. After you’ve spotted a good deal and have it under
contract, you can pass the deal along to another commercial investor you
network with.
60 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Developing relationships
After you’ve decided on the type of properties you want, the next step is to
think through all the different ways that you may be able to connect with
either the owner of the property or someone who knows the owner of the
property. Perhaps it’s someone who’s aware of some of the life challenges
that the owner may be facing. It’s unfortunate, but even commercial property
owners end up getting divorced or having medical issues. Or maybe the prop-
erty is having challenges that the owner himself can’t resolve.
How can you get to know people who are aware of the challenges that may
come up with the property itself? Did you think of property managers? Good
job if you did. What about county health department officials? These folks
will know about commercial properties that are in trouble because necessary
repairs have not been made. Don’t forget about everyone else who’s involved
in the real estate process, including commercial real estate brokers, residen-
tial real estate brokers, title agents, mortgage brokers, bankers, bankruptcy
attorneys, and eviction services.
You get the idea here. There are lots of ways you can either get to know or
find out about the owner of a property. In fact, our favorite method of buying
a property is sitting down directly with the owner to find out what the owner
wants. After you know this, you can often put together a great deal that meets
the seller’s needs, yet still allows you to make a big profit.
Never, ever attempt to “go around” a real estate broker. Even if you put a deal
together directly with the owner, make sure that the real estate broker earns
a commission, whether or not that broker is involved directly in helping put
the deal together. Commercial real estate is a small world and you can bet that
word gets around how you “stole” a client from a broker to get a deal. If you
get “stamped” with that reputation, other brokers will avoid you like the
plague.
The relationships you create with other investors, with commercial brokers,
with property owners, and everyone else in your life will be the lifeblood of
your commercial real estate investing business. It will also be the difference
between living a life that focuses only on material wealth compared with the
wealth of living a life that also embraces your ability to create lasting connec-
tions with other people.
Getting Leads on Commercial
Property Investments
When finding commercial property leads, it’s like fishing in an ocean rather
than a pond. A pond has a few varieties of fish, but oceans have many
61Chapter 4: On Your Mark, Get Set, Go Find Deals
different fish and about just as many ways to catch them. It’s important to
have an open mind when doing this because there is no “best way” to get
commercial leads. We share some of our favorite methods in this section.
Newspaper ads and publications
You can often find owners of commercial properties who want to sell by look-
ing at newspaper classified ads. The Wall Street Journal and The New York
Times are good places to get started, especially if you’re looking to buy in an
area that isn’t necessarily close to you. And we like these publications
because they list properties from all across the United States.
Your local newspapers and even some trade journals can be good resources
as well. Our local newspaper has a huge real estate section on Sundays as do
most large cities. Trade journals are good sources, but most of the good
properties listed are taken, so we mainly use them as potential relationship
sources. Who knows, maybe the seller has other properties she planned to
sell. You may be able to purchase them before they’re listed.
Internet sites of commercial real estate
A number of good Web sites can lead you to potential commercial real estate
deals. The most well known is www.loopnet.com, which is sort of a multiple
listing service for commercial real estate properties. Another well-known
online resource is CoStar.com (www.costar.com).
Or, why not go direct to the source: national commercial real estate broker-
age firms. They have their own Web sites with listings and valuable market
reports. The beauty of Internet sites is that if the property that we find there
is no longer available, we count it as all good because we have just made a
valuable contact. We can either sign up for property availability alerts or we
keep in touch with the realtor we made contact with. In many cases, we
found that the property we checked on was no longer available, but we
ended up buying another property that was soon to be listed.
Government agencies
Due to various guarantee and support programs, the federal government
ends up owning thousands of properties that they want you to buy. While
most of these are single-family homes, you can also find great commercial
deals from time to time by using this resource — as long as you know how
to find them.
62 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
The Office of Property Disposal sells government-owned commercial proper-
ties to the public. Check it out by going to www.homesales.gov, and then
clicking on the Buildings and Land tab. Or try the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) — Rural Development Real Estate for Sale (www.resales.
usda.gov). Its Web site has for sale government-owned real estate and
potential foreclosure sales for multifamily housing.
When a taxpayer defaults on his or her income taxes, the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) can file a lien against property owned by the taxpayer. At that
point, the taxpayer can’t sell or refinance the property without first settling
their debt with the IRS. If a property like this is foreclosed on, the IRS has 180
days after the foreclosure sale to redeem the property. Redeeming the prop-
erty means that the IRS comes up with all the money to pay off the amount
paid for the house at the auction. After the 180-day period, the IRS will lose
its rights if it doesn’t redeem the property.
The Government Services Administration, better known as GSA, and the IRS
have come up with a program where investors can provide the funds to
redeem the property. Here’s a rundown of this process: The investor gives
the IRS a minimum bid, and if the IRS is happy with the amount, it accepts the
bid. Then the GSA puts the property up for public sale. The investor who put
up the bid is automatically the first bidder for the GSA sale. As long as no
one else outbids the investor at the sale, the investor gets to purchase the
property for the amount of the bid that he or she put up.
Realtors and brokers
When looking for deals, you’re looking for commercial real estate firms that sell
commercial properties as their specialty. The Realtors and brokers that you
get to know can be incredible sources of commercial properties for you over
time. You want to focus on getting to know commercial brokers, but it’s also
important to understand that everyone in your network who may know of a
commercial property for sale is a potential source of another deal.
You can also connect with residential agents who have good relationships
with clients who have used the agents for buying and selling homes and who
also own commercial property. Some of our best commercial deals have come
from residential agents! You’re typically looking for the residential brokers
who have a client who owns just one or two commercial properties. When
you find a property this way, you have the added advantage of being able to
negotiate the price and terms with the owner before a commercial broker
simply overinflates the owner’s expectations by saying, “I can get you $10
million, no problem. Just give me the listing.”
63Chapter 4: On Your Mark, Get Set, Go Find Deals
How do you know when you’ve found the right real estate agent to work
with? Our answer? You never find one right real estate agent! Commercial bro-
kers earn their commissions by bringing you good commercial deals, so you
should never limit yourself to working with just one real estate agent. You
want to keep your options open. Commercial real estate is too big to limit
yourself. There’s no way that one agent can bring you all of your deals.
You’ll find agents who suggest that you work only with them. When you do,
don’t take the bait. Your response should sound something like this: “Mrs.
Agent, I will definitely work diligently with you to take a close look at any
commercial property you bring to my attention. Obviously, to meet the needs
of my investors, I need to be looking at properties in many areas and from
many different sources in a way that will protect my interests. I’ll work strictly
with you on anything that you provide me so you can make a commission at
closing, but I’ll do the same thing with other agents and brokers in my network.
I’ll also do my best to make sure that you don’t spend significant amounts of
time on a property that I have no intention of buying. Is that fair enough?”
Property owner associations
Join both the local and national chapters of any commercial property owner
or manager associations, as well as any other associations that may include
commercial property owners or brokers. Consider joining the National
Association of Apartment Owners (www.naahq.org) and finding a local
chapter to network with. You should also consider the Institute of Real Estate
Management (www.irem.org) because it focuses primarily on owners of
managers. Or if your interest lies in office buildings, join the Building Owners
and Managers Association (www.boma.org). There are 92 local chapters
nationwide. And for you shopping center lovers, take a look at the International
Council of Shopping Centers (www.icsc.org). They’re known for deal making
among themselves. Join the party.
After you join an association, how do you get the word out? Well, you can run
either a small display or classified ad in the association’s newsletter. You can
also stand up in meetings and announce your intentions, or just informally
tell other members what you’re looking for. We suggest that you do more
than the average investor would; that’s what it takes to get the great deals.
To get the most out of any association you belong to, try the following:
 Become a leader in the association. This means volunteering to be on
the board and stepping up to help produce events. In other words, find a
role in which you can be visible to the group.
64 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Often the best way to become known is by volunteering to be the mem-
bership chairperson or an officer of some sort; it isn’t a popular job, but
it’s one that allows you to get in front of the group at every meeting. As
you speak to the members in the audience, they’ll see you as a credible
authority and someone they’d like to get to know.
 Find ways to meet key people throughout the association. This doesn’t
mean that you simply exchange business cards. Doing so doesn’t work
to create the relationships that lead to profitable commercial deals falling
into your lap. Instead, make time to develop a connection so that when
you call these key folks, they already know who you are and have some
respect for you.
Real estate investment clubs
Most of the bigger cities in the United States have a number of local real estate
investment clubs. These groups provide great opportunities to network and
meet with other investors who have a similar interest in commercial property.
The members typically include just about everyone: beginning investors,
those interested in investing in homes, commercial investors, real estate bro-
kers, real estate attorneys, title company officers, appraisers, and others who
make their living from the various real estate investing professions. Most of
these associations meet once a month to discuss current events, share infor-
mation, and have an expert speak to the group. The meetings are actually
very educational to attend.
We first heard of these clubs years ago through word of mouth. After we
started to attend their meetings regularly, we heard of other existing clubs
as well as new clubs that we just starting. These days, to find clubs in your
city, enter “real estate investment club” into your Internet search engine. Or
try going onto the National Real Estate Investor Association Web site (www.
nationalreia.com) and search your area for the nearest club.
To get the most out of an investment group, we suggest starting a subgroup
for commercial real estate investing. Typically the group’s leadership will
provide support for this type of group because it’s an extra benefit to group
members. However, don’t forget to check with a group’s leaders before
announcing the subgroup’s start. But rest assured that because you’re run-
ning it, the leaders will likely be okay with it (after all, they don’t have to put
any extra effort into it).
As the group’s leader, you can pick the meeting topics and either have group
discussions on these topics or invite someone, such as a commercial lender
or commercial broker, to give you their view on the marketplace. You’ll find
that there’s no shortage of people who are willing to come and share their
expertise, because most folks know that they’re going to end up getting
clients as the group gets to know them.
65Chapter 4: On Your Mark, Get Set, Go Find Deals
Looking Locally and Nationwide
As you become an investor, you need to decide whether you want to limit
yourself to investing locally or whether you want to open yourself to the pos-
sibility of investing across the nation or even in other countries. We explain
everything you need to know in the following sections.
Surveying the pros and
cons of local investing
How do you decide whether to venture out and invest in another state or
whether you should stay local? Well, each strategy has its ups and downs.
If you’re investing locally, you can work the relationships that you build
locally because it’s easier to have a cup of coffee or lunch as you get to know
those in your network. Depending on how much of the work you plan to do
yourself, you’ll be nearby and able to oversee the work of contractors and
vendors. You may even find it possible to manage a smaller property on your
own when you’re just starting out.
66 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Getting leads through friends
From Peter Conti: As a father of four kids, it’s dif-
ficult for me to avoid talking about my children.
I’ve found that, when I’m getting to know some-
one, I enjoy finding out about other people’s kids
as well. Earlier in my career, I got to know a real
state broker named Jesse whose son was born
the same month as mine. We got together at
times for a business lunch and at other times for
dinner with our families. After getting to know
Jesse informally over the course of a year and
a half, I suggested trading all the names in my
property owners’ database for all the names in
Jesse’s database. By doing this, both of us were
able to increase the number and accuracy of
the commercial property owner contact infor-
mation we could access.
As a result of expanding my database, I was
able to make numerous offers to owners that
previously weren’t accessible to me. In just one
of these offers, I used creative financing to pur-
chase a medium-sized commercial property,
using none of my own money. This property is
still in my portfolio, steadily bringing in a passive
stream of cash flow each and every month year
in and year out.
Some of the best deals that I have found came
my way simply because of a relationship that
was started for reasons beyond real estate.
When you operate this way you’ll discover
many people who you can now call friends. You,
too, can use commercial real estate to meet
great people, have fun, and of course make
money.
The main downside to investing locally, however, is that you’re limited to just
the commercial properties in your area. What if you can’t find a good deal
close by? What if properties are too expensive? And why would you want to
limit yourself to just investing locally when you can pick from any of the thou-
sands of commercial properties available across the entire United States?
Another disadvantage to investing locally is that you’re likely to be tempted to
stop by, give your advice, and stick your nose into situations that should have
been outsourced to a property management company (check out Chapter 11
for more on property management).
Many of our Commercial Mentoring students struggle with this disadvantage
at first. They want to find that perfect commercial property right down the
street so they can drive by and monitor it. Of course, unless there’s a tornado,
real estate — whether it’s in Kansas City, Chicago, or San Francisco — isn’t
going anywhere.
To get through this struggle, we encourage our students to focus on buying
properties that are so big that, even if they did want to manage them them-
selves, they couldn’t. With a big property, you need a team of people to help
you manage. Ideally, you’ll have a quality management team in place. This
may be a different way of looking at things, but if you’re going for the big life,
why not go about it with gusto.
Investing outside of your community
Many of us who live in big cities have had to go out of our states to find com-
mercial properties that meet our investment objectives. And this is because
sale prices in big cities have increased so much that our investment returns
have shrunk to almost nothing. Going out of your community, you’ll find the
kind of great deals that were in your city years ago. In most cases, it’s just a
matter of time before that community will be out of your price range too. If
you live in the city, consider going to the suburbs to look for deals. Go to the
outskirts of your community, to “sleepy” towns and undiscovered areas, to
find your next great deal. You may find lower prices, great investment returns,
and greater growth than you would in an already matured big city.
Secondary investment markets are markets outside of big city markets that are
much smaller and less developed. These are potentially great places to begin
investing because you’re entering a market that has yet to fully mature. You
are basically getting in on the bottom. Properties found in secondary markets
have lower prices and rents that aren’t too far off the levels of big city markets.
Tertiary markets are even smaller than secondary markets and can be quite
scary to invest into because of this. We’ve invested in some of these markets
before where the population was only 15,000. That’s scary for most folks, but
67Chapter 4: On Your Mark, Get Set, Go Find Deals
the town had everything going for it that we liked — growing population,
stable job growth, a vibrant local economy, and a demand for what we’re
investing into. It made sense for us, we saw it as good risk, and in the end
we’re still being rewarded.
Determining your location
with demographics
If you could peek into the boardroom at Wal-Mart as the leaders were decid-
ing where to put their newest stores, do you think they’d be throwing darts at
a map of cities and neighborhoods? No, of course not. Those Wal-Mart lead-
ers are going to examine demographic and market indicators to know what’s
going on before making an investment to add a store in another location.
The study of demographics allows you, as a commercial real estate investor,
to pick the areas of the country that are most likely to have the conditions
that make commercial property a successful investment. Demographics
include the following:
 Finding out about the population trends and knowing how likely it is that
those trends will continue
 Determining who’s moving where and when, and then figuring out why
 Discovering how many people are moving into an area
 Figuring out what factors attract people to an area and understanding
how stable these factors are
It’s true that when talking about what makes a good real estate location, good
economic times and prosperity are a big piece of the puzzle. So, when you’re
looking for the market in which to buy your commercial property, find mar-
kets where jobs are increasing, where median income is rising, and where
companies are relocating and hiring people.
As an area develops, you’ll see that some of the businesses that come in will
look at what’s going on there and they’ll find a bigger business that depends
on similar demographics as their own. Then they’ll wait until the bigger busi-
ness does the research and casts in the same waters, only tagging along after
that business is successful. As you get to know these patterns, you can hit on
an area where the demographics are right for development.
With commercial real estate, it’s all about being in the path of progress or
going into a marketplace that’s really at the point of taking off because of the
people moving in and businesses growing to support them. If you have a strip
mall in this area and suddenly a lot of new apartment buildings go up and
people come into the area, your rents in the strip mall will likely increase.
68 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
And with higher rents from a commercial property, you get increased prop-
erty values and, of course, a boost in cash flow.
Here are a couple of tips to keep in mind:
 Large retail chain stores, also known as big box retailers, spend millions
of dollars every year on demographic studies on where to build their
next stores. Wal-Mart and Home Depot are a couple of typical examples.
So why not save your time and money and start investing where you see
those folks break ground for new stores? They’ve already done their
research and have decided to invest tens of millions of dollars in that
location. We suggest that you find out what’s in demand there and follow
right behind them.
 Another way to recognize growth that’s right around the corner is to
watch the Department of Transportation. When you see freeways being
built and on and off ramps being constructed, you better believe that it’s
happening for a reason. The government is planning for and expects
growth in that area. Hop on the bandwagon by asking the city’s chamber
of commerce or the city’s department of economic development what
their master plan is. These are the best places to get specific demographic
information quickly. You may want to buy up land nearby and wait for
developers to approach you. Or you may want to start buying commer-
cial property nearby before anyone else discovers what’s going on.
Locking Down Deals: Don’t Leave
Home without These Tools
As a commercial real estate investor, you should never leave home without
the tools you need to buy commercial properties. You never know when you
might stumble upon an excellent deal that you need to quickly analyze and
get under contract. Here’s a list of the essentials:
 A good cellphone that allows you to talk, send and receive e-mail,
and take pictures of properties: Also, look for the voice memo feature
so that you can record notes about properties or ideas when you’re out
and about.
 An addendum template that you can attach to any commercial real
estate contract: This addendum should include the escape clauses and
other language that allows you to lock up a property under contract
while still retaining the ability to get out of the deal if you don’t like it.
 An outside third party or mentor: You need a mentor that you can talk
to or run a deal by to make sure that you aren’t getting caught up in the
emotions of the deal. Mentors are also great for reassuring you that
you’re making good decisions.
69Chapter 4: On Your Mark, Get Set, Go Find Deals
We also feel that you need to understand the three Rs of commercial real
estate investing. Knowing these Rs can help you avoid wasting time on mar-
ginal commercial deals:
 Risk: How much of my money would be at risk? Would I be personally
liable for debt that’s used to fund the deal? How could this deal negatively
affect my life’s goals and relationships? How much time will it take?
 Reward: How much profit is in the deal? When would I see that money
(cash at closing from a refinance, cash flow over time, or long-term equity
I’d tap into in a few years, for example)? How certain am I of realizing
that profit? In other words, what has to happen for me to end up with
cash in hand?
We also look for any “deal sweeteners” we can easily use to bump up the
cash flow or value from the property. And we look for ways to structure
the financing to increase cash flow or cash-on-cash return.
 Roll out: Is this a one-shot deal or can I replicate it with another prop-
erty? Can I use my learning and effort from this deal as a template for
later deals? What contacts and relationships will this deal bring me that
will be valuable for me to do more deals in future? Can I expand and
leverage this deal into a much larger opportunity?
Allowing the Great Deals to Find You
We know of investors out there who are true deal magnets. Every time we
hear from them or see them in person, they’re always telling us about the
deal that just happened to fall into their laps. Of course, that’s what it
appears like to us. But we know better. These folks have set up brilliant and
fun systems of having deals find them. Read on and see how to rev up a
system like theirs for yourself.
Attracting owners with reports
Rather than trying to chase down all the commercial property owners and
hoping to approach them at just the right time — when they’re ready to talk
about selling their property — here’s a better way: Create systems that allow
commercial property owners to be attracted to you.
For example, one thing we have done is to create a special report called “Three
Little Known Ways to Increase the Value of Your Commercial Property.” We
tell commercial property owners that we have this valuable report available
70 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
and that they can have it for free; all they need to do is provide their contact
information. In the past, we sent the special reports through the mail. Mailing
these reports not only took lots of time, but it also used up a lot of envelopes
and stamps. A better way of getting commercial property owners to respond
is by going to your Web site after you send them a postcard or perhaps you
place an ad in the property owners’ association newsletter. The ad would
look something like what you see in Figure 4-1.
An ad like the one shown in Figure 4-1 encourages the commercial property
owner to visit your one-page Web site that provides more information about
the special report. After all, commercial property owners will want to get this
report in their hands right away. All they need to do is enter their name and
e-mail address on the Web site and they’ll get the special report instantly.
The great thing about this process is that you acquire their contact info,
which allows you a way of contacting these owners in the future. You also
hope that it will allow the owners to get to know more about you and for you
to get to know more about them.
Making unsolicited offers
Properties that aren’t listed for sale that you make offers on are unsolicited
offers. This is a superb way to add commercial properties to your portfolio.
Here’s what we did, and you can do the same: We went to a title company and
got a copy of all large (50-plus units) apartment owners’ names and addresses
in a certain city. We sent letters to every one of them telling them that we are
interested in purchasing their property. On half of the properties, we had
enough bare property info to send purchase contracts via certified mail. We
got a much higher response from the owners that received contracts than
just letters of interest. The most interesting thing we found was that nearly
all the owners who responded to us had additional properties they wanted to
sell. You can do the same on shopping centers, office buildings, or warehouses.
Recent Market Changes Affect Commercial Property Values
To get your copy of this free special report called
“Th ree Little Known Ways to Increase the Value of Your Commercial Property”
go to www.HowToIncreaseValue.com
Figure 4-1:
A sample
ad to spark
interest
from
property
owners.
71Chapter 4: On Your Mark, Get Set, Go Find Deals
Discovering properties that
have been relisted
One of the biggest frustrations for commercial investors looking for great
deals is talking to the brokers or owners way too early in the process. Often
the owner may list the property at a certain price, and either because of the
owner’s false expectations or because the broker has misjudged the market,
the property has been priced too high and the numbers don’t make sense —
even if you did get great terms.
If you run into this type of situation, wait it out and let the marketplace bring
the owner’s expectations down to earth. When the owner of the property is
ready to relist the property for the second or third time, he usually becomes
more realistic about where the asking price should really be.
Because commercial properties don’ t have a multiple listing service like resi-
dential properties do, some of the best deals come from those properties that
have been relisted at a new price, but the new price hasn’t been announced
in the marketplace.
To take advantage of a deal like this, you need to find a way to keep in touch
with the broker and preferably with the owner of any property of interest
that you run across. Contact the owner by using e-mail, by sending out a
reminder postcard, or by simply leaving a quick message over the phone.
The following are some examples of how you can word the messages. After
the owner comes down to earth on the pricing, make contact directly.
Here’s a sample e-mail to an owner of an overpriced property:
Subject: I’d still like to buy your commercial property.
Hey there,
This is Peter Conti, and a while back, we took a look at purchasing the
commercial property that you had available. We like the property itself,
but were not able to have the numbers make sense at the price you were
asking at that time.
If you should ever decide to make a significant drop in the price or other
concessions that you feel would make this property attractive to us
again, please contact me at 303-233-2233.
Sincerely,
Peter Conti
Here’s a sample postcard to an owner of an overpriced property:
If you really want to sell, I’d really like to buy your property located at 123
Main Street. Let’s have coffee together when you’re ready to make a deal.
72 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Call Peter Conti at 800-952-9585
Here’s a sample message left on voicemail for an owner of an overpriced
property:
Hey, this is Peter Conti. I’m calling about your property at 123 Main Street.
You may remember me. I looked at the property several months ago, and
I really wanted to buy it. The problem was that I just couldn’t make the
numbers work with the price being so high. When you’re ready, call me
because we can close in 30 days if needed. My phone number is
303-233-2233. Thanks for your time.
Unlisted properties: Hidden
fish in the streams
We suggest talking to property owners who don’t currently have their proper-
ties listed. With this tactic, you’re looking for the property owners who have
thought of selling, but who aren’t actively marketing their property for sale.
How can you find these commercial property owners? One way is to run a
simple “property wanted” ad in your local newspaper. Here’s some language
that worked for coauthor Peter Conti:
Private investor wants commercial property. Will look at all, any condition.
Call Peter at 303-233-2233.
You can also send direct-mail flyers or postcards to commercial property
owners. To do so, you first need to create a list of the names and addresses of
the commercial property owners in the areas that you’re interested in. Look
for companies that provide these lists online. These companies put together
lists after purchasing information from the county recorder’s office. They put
information into their databases, and then sell specific lists to investors and
other users. To find a list company in your area, ask other investors at your
local investors’ association. If you don’t have success there, take a trip to
your county recorder’s office; there you can ask about the companies that
purchase information to make it available for resale.
Many of the addresses that you get for commercial properties end up at prop-
erty management companies or other entities. They may either fail to pass
your interest along to the owner or deliberately keep you from contacting the
owner. If you’re unable to come up with an address that goes directly to a prop-
erty owner, you may have to do additional research to get the appropriate con-
tact info. Some property owner associations also have directories that provide
names and addresses of commercial property owners who are members.
However, if you use this as a resource, make sure that you don’t violate any of
the guidelines the association may have about marketing to other members.
73Chapter 4: On Your Mark, Get Set, Go Find Deals
74 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Chapter 5
Strategies for Making
Offers and Negotiating
In This Chapter
 Getting your offers accepted
 Using the Instant Offer System
 Touching base with the seller
 Writing offers with contracts or letters of intent
 Knowing when a deal is worthy of your time
 Moving on after the seller has accepted your offer
So maybe you’ve found what you think could be a great deal. It’s okay if
you’re unsure about the deal’s strength because in this chapter you dis-
cover how and why the seasoned pros constantly make offers to buy com-
mercial property without needing to know all the important facts about
whether a property might be successful or not.
This chapter explores how you can increase your chances of actually getting
a deal accepted and what to do after your offer has been accepted. We also
give you tips on successfully dealing with sellers, paperwork, and contracts.
After you understand how easy it is to sign up a deal — including using a spe-
cial escape clause that makes it risk free — you’ll be doing it all the time.
Increasing Your Chances of Getting
Your Offer Accepted
The best investors have discovered that they must conserve their time and
energy when looking at properties and making offers. If you aren’t careful you
can waste all your time on deals that aren’t worth buying. So, follow these
three rules to increase your chances of getting an offer accepted:
 Use a qualifying system so that you’re focusing only on the leads that
have a high probability of turning into deals.
 Know the strategies that will make a deal work and direct the negotia-
tion toward a winning deal right from the start.
 Use a systematic method to negotiate and put the deal together instead
of relying on gut feelings or some other nonrepeatable process.
Starting with the end in mind
To increase the chances of getting your offer accepted, you need to under-
stand some of the games that are played in the commercial real estate arena.
Making offers used to sound something like this: Offer a low price or great
terms and be willing to negotiate up from there.
Now it’s oftentimes a matter of getting the ball rolling by using an initial offer
that gets the broker’s or seller’s attention and with not too much back and
forth so that your offer quickly becomes a signed contract. Then it’s a matter
of ethically negotiating down to a purchase agreement that allows you to
have the return on investment and cash flow you need to make the deal work.
One of the biggest mistakes you can make is writing up every offer as a winning
deal for you right from the start. You probably won’t close on a deal unless it’s
a win for you, but due to the competition in the marketplace and the games
that brokers play, we often (as crazy as it sounds) make offers that we know
contain terms or conditions that we can’t meet, just to get the ball rolling.
Sizing up the sellers and
what they really want
Putting together great deals involves finding out what the seller really wants
to accomplish, and then finding a way to structure the deal where you give
the seller what he absolutely needs, while keeping enough of the benefits
in the deal over on your side of the table to make it a huge win for you as well.
We understand that when most folks start investing, they may not have tons
of cash laying around to put into deals. So, if you fall into this category,
instead of sitting around moaning about it, focus on those commercial prop-
erty owners who don’t need or want cash right now. These sellers are found
in three groups:
 Owners who are ready to sell but don’t want to pay capital gains tax
 Property owners who prefer to get a secure cash flow each month rather
than a big chunk of cash all at once
76 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
 Owners who have made tons of money by investing in commercial prop-
erties and simply want to see someone who’s passionate about their
property become the new owner
The single most-important skill you have as an investor is your ability to con-
nect emotionally with people. This skill will help you create trust and rapport
with the seller, which in turn helps you get the seller to open up about his real
reasons for selling. Master this skill and you’ll never really be “negotiating a
deal.” Rather, you’ll be helping the seller to come up with a solution that is
an acceptable win for the seller, and that is a great deal for you too.
Compare this to how most investors negotiate: Many commercial investors
use what we like to call the “big stick” method of negotiation. These investors
go in and negotiate with hardball tactics. And for some this works. However,
we’ve found that it isn’t a good fit for us, and so we don’t recommend it.
In fact, we’ve discovered that most investors we’ve worked with just don’t
feel good going in and beating up the broker or seller. Plus, we’ve found that
hardball tactics aren’t an effective way to get a good deal. Sure, if you’re
simply negotiating a low-ball cash price for the property, these tactics may
work, but we still believe there are better ways to get a low cash price.
However, when you’re looking not just to get a good price on the property,
but to also negotiate great terms, it’s essential to negotiate with people in
such a way that you maintain your connection and rapport with them.
For instance, we won’t ask you to give a broker a “take it or leave it” last offer.
And we won’t ask you to fight with the seller over a price. Instead, we suggest
that you use simple questions worded with powerful language patterns.
Following this system will do much of the negotiating work for you.
So, you don’t need to have a magnetic personality to persuade sellers to sell
to you. What you need instead is a supply of sincere care for the other person
and the willingness not just to listen to them but to really hear what they are
telling you. By using these powerful negotiating tools, you’ll become unstop-
pable. And the better you get at connecting with people, the wealthier you’ll
become. Not only will you end up with more commercial real estate, but
you’ll also probably be happier, have more friends, and even communicate
better with your family.
Sealing Deals: The Instant Offer System
Okay, so you’ve found what you think may be a great deal. As we note earlier
in this chapter, getting the deal you want isn’t about writing up the perfect
offer as much as it is about finding a way to connect with the other parties
and discover what they really want. The way to do this is by using the Instant
Offer System.
77Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating
Here are the five steps of the Instant Offer System:
1. Build rapport with the broker or seller.
2. Establish an upfront agreement.
3. Build the broker’s or seller’s motivation level for selling.
4. Determine the financial details of the deal (also known as the “Money
Step”).
5. Find the critical pieces to a winning deal (also known as the “What-If
Step”).
One of the easiest and hardest things to do is play the role of the reluctant
buyer. It’s easy because the concept is so simple. You just have to make sure
that you appear more reluctant to move ahead on the deal than the seller or
broker. On the other hand, the reason it can be so difficult is that when a deal
looks like it’s going to come together, it’s hard not showing your excitement
and even harder to appear reluctant.
Step 1: Build rapport with
the broker or seller
Rapport is a fancy word that means “connected like friends.” Connecting with
people (in this case brokers and sellers) is easy when you follow these steps:
1. Listen and be 100-percent present. These days no one is ever fully pre-
sent. When you give your full, undivided attention to someone, they are
going to love it.
2. Notice and briefly point out those things that you have in common
with someone else.
This technique works because people like others who are similar to
them. Get them to talk about their interests and you’ve connected on
a common ground.
3. Continue to listen to them instead of talking too much yourself. Make
sure you remain 100-percent present.
To initially create rapport with a seller, find or create an environment where
you have the time and quiet space to spend two or three hours if needed in
getting to know the broker or seller. Being in an office environment with inter-
rupting phone calls or in a room with the TV blaring isn’t going to work. When
creating the proper space to connect, look for a place where you feel com-
fortable having a cup of coffee or a glass of juice while you hang out for a
few hours.
78 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
After the seller starts to relax, she will feel more comfortable around you and
will (hopefully) start to like you. When people like you, they will also tend to
open up and trust you more — which is one of your goals when trying to get
a great deal on a property.
One of the most important things to master is building an emotional connec-
tion with the broker or seller of the commercial property. As part of putting
together winning deals, you need to get comfortable with helping the broker
open up enough so that you can fully understand the seller’s situation and
motivation. No matter how you plan on structuring a purchase, you’ll always
fare better if you can work collaboratively with the broker or seller instead of
working like it’s you against her. Maintaining a high level of rapport with the
broker and the seller is the glue that holds this connection together.
After you’ve built an initial rapport with a broker or seller, make sure to con-
tinue the rapport all the way through the negotiation. We like to refer to impor-
tant connection points, such as a sport or hobby that the seller is interested
in. For example, you might say, “Even if you had to settle for $6 million, at least
you’d be done with this and able to go sailing every day.” Here are some items
to focus on to keep the connection going:
 Things that you have in common with the broker or seller: If you know
that the broker likes football, make sure that you know enough about
the recent games to chat about the results from the weekend when you
call to check up on a listing at the beginning of the week.
Ideally (and even though it may sound a little creepy), you may want to
use a database to help you keep track of the broker’s and seller’s inter-
ests. Otherwise, you’ll never be able to remember which of your clients
likes football and music and which one enjoys horseback riding and
tennis.
 Things that you may not have in common but that the broker or seller
is passionate about: One of the perks of investing in real estate is the
number of interesting people you get to meet. When you really get to
know someone, one of the benefits is that they share details about their
passions and areas of interest. The critical key is that you have an inter-
est in what is important to them, even if you don’t have it in common.
So, you get to make a friend and also find out all about a new sport, busi-
ness, or other passion that you may not have known much about prior
to meeting this person.
Here’s the upside to all of this: Because people love to talk about themselves
and their interests, the more you can get the broker or owner to share with
you, the more connected both of you are going to feel with each other.
79Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating
Step 2: Establish an upfront agreement
An upfront agreement is an understanding between you and the broker or seller
that each time you invest your time in talking about a deal you’ll both tell
each other exactly where you stand at the end of your discussion. Having this
agreement helps you avoid spending enormous amounts of time trying to
make a deal work that isn’t ever going to meet the other party’s needs.
In its simplest form, the upfront agreement that we use with commercial
properties sounds something like this:
Investor: Mr. Broker, if you end up hating the ideas we talk through today,
are you okay with letting me know that you don’t like any of the ideas we
came up with together?
Broker: Sure.
Investor: And I understand that, until we get to the point where we might
be including the seller directly in our conversations, you can’t answer for
the seller. On the other hand, if you do feel that any of the ideas we come
up with may get us all to the closing table, are you okay sharing that with
me as well?
Broker: Yes, I am.
Investor: Great, I appreciate that. Now I’ll be doing the same thing. If I don’t
feel that this property is a good fit for our group, I’ll let you know. And if I
do think that what we talk through today is a fit, I’ll let you know. I want
to be respectful of your time and my time, so at the end I’ll let you know
exactly where we stand — either yes it is a fit or no it isn’t. And under-
standing that you have limitations until the seller is here with us directly,
I would appreciate the same courtesy from you. Is that fair?
Broker: Sure, no problem.
Step 3: Build the broker’s or seller’s
motivation level for selling
It is part of human nature that someone who has owned a commercial prop-
erty for a period of time is probably going to have an inflated idea of the type
of offers they may be getting. After all, one of the nice things about owning a
property that gives you a passive stream of cash flow is daydreaming about
exactly how much your little “gold mine” is going to be worth some day. So,
make sure that you use this step to bring the seller’s motivation into the
equation.
Another problem you may run into is that sometimes brokers let sellers
retain the idea that their properties are worth more than it is simply to get
80 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
the property listed. The broker knows that over time there’s a good chance
that he can get the seller to either lower the asking price or counter to a
lower offer so that the sale actually happens.
By mastering the motivation step (which really is the most important step of
the Instant Offer System), you can get the broker and seller to open up with
you so that you know enough about the seller’s real needs while still being
profitable from your end. This is why during the four-day training we do with
our Commercial Mentoring Program students, we invest a good portion of
one day to mastering this step.
Your goal in Step 3 of the Instant Offer System is to help both the broker and
the seller to:
 Understand their respective motivations for getting the deal done.
 Share with you the opportunities for you to improve the net income
from the property. It’s important for the broker and the seller to recog-
nize that because you profit by improving properties, this commercial
property isn’t for you if it’s “perfect.”
For a real-life example of how the motivation step works, let’s “listen in” to a
conference call with one of our Commercial Mentoring clients named Lisa. In
this script, Lisa is the investor and Rob is the Commercial Mentoring coach:
Lisa: Hi Rob, I’ve got a deal I’m really excited about.
Rob: Hi Lisa, I’ve been looking through the Platinum Form you submitted
into the online system, and this looks like it could be a nice deal. I see
that the cash-on-cash return is just over 12 percent.
Lisa: Yeah, but that percentage is based on the numbers from the broker.
I met with the seller yesterday, and he didn’t seem to want to tell me
much other than “It’s a great deal.”
Rob: Okay. How long has it been for sale?
Lisa: About nine months now.
Rob: So, if it’s such a great deal, why hasn’t someone else bought it?
Lisa: I was wondering the same thing. That’s why I need you to help me
figure out what to do here.
Rob: What did it sound like when you went through the motivation step?
Lisa: I found out that the seller wants to buy a small shopping center
rather than this apartment building.
Rob: That’s it?
Lisa: Well, yes. I guess I should have spent more time on the motivation
step, huh?
81Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating
Rob: Try this with the seller. Say to him “The good thing for you is that
most people would stay awake at night worrying about an apartment
building like this. You seem to be pretty well rested. It’s nice that you’re
able to avoid thinking about this building 24 hours a day.” Lisa, you need
to spend some time here and get the seller to open up. Let’s face it, a
motivated seller isn’t going to step right up and say, “I’m desperate.” So, I
want you to go back to see the seller and find out how much time you can
spend in the motivation step. Then I or one of the other coaches will help
you to move ahead with the next steps.
Lisa: I can do that!
Other investors can almost always see ways to improve a deal that you’re
involved in. The reason is that all of us get too close to the deals that we’re
working on. Another investor can help to point out things that are usually
obvious. Find a group of supportive investors who have goals and values that
are similar to yours. If you want to listen to a conference call where we help
our clients in the Commercial Mentoring Program get better at using the
motivation step, call 800-551-5993. It’s a recording so you can listen 24 hours
a day.
Step 4: Determine the financial details
of the deal (The Money Step)
After you’ve discovered the seller’s motivation, move on and get all the finan-
cial details onto the table so you can start working with the seller to create a
deal that meets his most important needs and has a fair profit for you. When
done well, this step helps you lower the seller’s expectations of what the com-
mercial property is worth so that you can get a good buy on the property.
Make sure that you follow all the steps of the Instant Offer System in the
order described. The first three steps are critical and need to happen prior
to the Money Step. In this step, you use three simple techniques to help
lower the seller’s or broker’s expectations. We explain these techniques in
the following sections.
Money Step technique 1: Realistic expectations
With this technique, you look at the broker or seller with that insider glint in
your eye that says, “Hey, come on now. We both know that you might be
asking $4.5 million for the property, but you don’t really expect to get that
much do you?” This technique usually gets the price down by 3 to 10 percent.
Here’s what you say: “So, how much do you realistically expect to get?”
When you say this phrase, make sure you do these three things to make it
even more powerful:
82 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
1. “Mark” the word “realistically” by using just your voice.
You can do this by putting a very slight pause right before and right
after the word that you’re “marking.”
2. Scrunch up your face by moving your mouth as close as possible to
your nose.
Try scrunching now. Good job. Now do the scrunch and mark the word
“realistically” as you ask the question. See how much better you sound
already?
3. Lower the pitch of your voice while saying the word “realistically.”
Say “realistically,” making sure you take your pitch down as you say the
word. Why do you do this? Because it works. When your voice goes
down, you’re sending a subliminal signal that the price should also be
going down.
What happens if the broker or seller doesn’t come down at all? At this point,
don’t fight with him about it. You haven’t lost anything by asking, and you
still have more techniques to use.
Money Step technique 2: The range
Turn the lowest price that the broker gives you into a range with his number
as the high end of the range. It sounds like this:
You (starting off with the realistic expectations technique): So how much
did you realistically expect to get?
Broker: Well it’s listed at $7.5 million, but between you and me, I think the
seller just might accept an offer of $7 million.
You (here you’re going to use the range technique): Wow, that much? $6.5
to $7 million?
If the broker doesn’t object, he has just clued you in to the low end of the
range as the new point from which you’ll negotiate. If the broker defends the
$7 million price, simply shrink your range and feed it back to the broker
again. It sounds like this:
Broker: No, I said $7 million.
You: Oh, okay. I get it . . . $6.8 to $7 million.
This is sort of a question, but not one you want the broker to answer. Instead,
you want to simply state the range (all the while nodding your head ever so
slightly up and down indicating agreement. Think of how you’d nod to a
friend as you say, “It’s a nice day out today, isn’t it?” When you reach a point
where the broker or seller stops correcting you, you’ve just moved the
amount you’re negotiating down another notch.
83Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating
It’s important here to nod your head in agreement and give out all the non-
verbal cues that you’re agreeing with the broker even though you’re subtly
changing his answer in a way that fits for you.
The range you should use depends on your local real estate market. If you’re
in a slow market, be aggressive in your choice of opening ranges by shooting
for a much lower number. If you’re investing in a hot market, use a smaller
opening range.
This technique, just like everything else in this book, only works if you use it.
Don’t be afraid if the seller does object to your range. This technique lets you
test the water and find out where the broker’s and seller’s real limits are. You
can shrink your range two or three times until you find the point where the
other party is comfortable.
Money Step technique 3: The fictitious buyer
With this technique, you introduce a fictitious buyer through a real estate
agent to help knock 3 to 6 percent off the price. However, remember that this
technique won’t work unless you’re talking directly with a seller who hasn’t
listed his property.
You’ll discover that this is a fun technique to use. Why? Consider this: If the
seller would accept an offer through a real estate agent, he would have to pay
commission to the real estate agent. So, in essence, he’s saying that the price
would be lower by 2 percent to as much as 5 or 6 percent to cover the com-
mission. Some sellers will point out that they would be willing to pay for a
buyer’s agent commission but not for a listing commission. In this case, they’re
saying that they’re willing to knock 2 or 3 percent off the purchase price. Here’s
a sample script you can use:
Investor: So, if a broker came in here and told you that he could have this
commercial property completely sold, done, and handled at that $4 mil-
lion price, and you really believed that he could get it done within 60
days, you’d probably tell him to take a hike . . . huh?
Seller: No, I’d be crazy not to take that.
Investor: Okay, so help me figure this out. Five percent of $4 million is . . . .
The two key points with this technique are for you to use the negative phras-
ing as shown in the sample script and to make sure that you do the math
slowly to ensure that the seller feels comfortable with the final answer.
After you’ve used the three Money Step techniques to talk the seller’s price
from, say, $4.5 million down to $3.8 million, does this make $3.8 million the
final price? No, it simply means that $3.8 million is the starting point of what
the seller wants. If, during the Money Step, you’re writing notes on a scratch
84 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
pad in front of the seller, don’t write any number down until you get to the
lowest number after using all three techniques. Then when you write this
number down, you’re legitimizing it as the “full amount” that the seller will
get. Depending on the terms you negotiate, you may go ahead and give the
seller this “full amount,” or you may feel that you still need to negotiate to get
it lower. At the very least, you have just discovered how to simply and easily
decrease the price by at least 8 to 10 percent or more from the original asking
price.
Step 5: Find the critical pieces to a
winning deal (The What-If Step)
During this final step of the Instant Offer System, your goal is to close the
deal. The What-If step allows you to get the broker or seller to agree to an
offer before you ever make one. In fact, wouldn’t it be nice to make offers
only to sellers you know would say yes? Well, you can! You’re going to do it
by using the two most powerful words in any negotiation: “what if.” This is a
powerful phrase because it commits you to nothing and commits the other
side to everything.
For example, imagine that you’re negotiating to purchase a 20-acre piece of
land. You’ve done most of your negotiating, and you’re in the final stages
of closing the deal. Instead of making an offer such as “Mrs. Seller, I’ll pay you
$8 million dollars for your land,” ask a what-if question. This question would
sound something like this:
Mrs. Seller, I don’t know if I can do this, but what if I were able to pay you $7
to maybe as much as $8 million for your land? Is that something that’s even
worth taking the time to talk about . . . or probably not?”
Notice the subtle difference between these two ways of making your offer:
When you make a formal offer, you give all control over the deal to the other
party. You’ve made an offer; the seller gets to say yes or no. When you qualify
your offer by using the what-if phrasing, you aren’t really making a formal
offer. However, after the seller agrees to your what-if offer, the seller has com-
mitted herself to saying yes! This technique is your way of never making an
offer until the seller has agreed to at least being open to it.
This technique is your way of never making an offer until the seller has agreed
to at least being open to it. Only when the seller says, “Yes, let’s talk about
your offer,” do you actually move ahead with it. If the seller isn’t up for your
what-if offer, simply move on to another until you find one that she agrees to.
Then you can see whether you can put a deal together based on this accept-
able what-if offer.
85Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating
How to Meet the Seller When
Submitting Your Offer
As a real estate investor, you’ve probably run into the following statement
from a broker too many times to count: “I’m sorry but I can’t let you meet the
seller.” You may have tried to get around this by insisting to be present when
your offer is submitted. The challenge with this tactic, however, is that if the
agent allows you to be there but he downplays your offer both before and
after you’re in the room, then you are sunk?
We stress throughout this chapter that to put together great commercial
deals you need to not only meet the seller, but you also need to get to know
him. You need to become friends with him. You need to take the time to really
listen so that you have the best possible chance of putting together a deal
that works for the seller and for you.
Here are a few ways to meet directly with the seller:
 Limit your offers and negotiations only to for-sale-by-owner property
that isn’t listed with an agent. This is the simplest way to make sure
that you connect directly with the seller (and a method we’ve used
extensively when guiding our mentorship students to buy single-family
houses), but we don’t recommend it as the only method. Why? Because
most of the commercial properties that you’d want to buy are probably
going to be listed with a real estate agent.
 Make an offer on the property knowing that after you’ve written up a
serious offer, you’re in a much better position to ask for a meeting
face to face with the seller. We use this choice on a regular basis by sug-
gesting to the broker that a meeting may very well lead to a commission
for the broker.
The last option in the preceding list sounds something like this (with you
speaking to the broker):
Thanks for all of your help with this. I’ve found that the deals I’m able to
take to a closing quickly usually result from a quick meeting where all of
us — you, me, and the seller — get together to answer each other’s questions
and find the best way to get this deal put to bed. Does that make any sense to
you at all, or should I just figure that this deal is going to take months of back
and forth before it finally dies?
Notice the language (underlined) that subtly reminds the broker of the clos-
ing, which is when the broker gets paid. If the broker doesn’t give in, try
saying this:
86 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
So, I’m getting the feeling that perhaps I should just pass on this deal and
spend my time on one of the other commercial properties that I’m consider-
ing with another agent.
No matter which method you use to connect with the seller, make sure that
both the seller and the broker know that you insist on the broker receiving
her real estate commission. We regularly meet directly with sellers and take
the extra step of reassuring the seller and the broker that the broker’s com-
mission will be paid no matter how the deal comes together.
Writing Up the Offer
If you’ve met directly with the broker or seller, and have put together a win-
ning deal, then you’ll probably just write up a contract on the spot. What
about the properties that are in another state or that you want to make an
offer on as a way of opening the door to further negotiations? Do you send a
simple one-page letter of intent or do you need to send a formal purchase
contract? The answer is really one of preference.
Some of our Commercial Mentoring students insist that a letter of intent saves
time, is easy to send out, and tells you whether you and the seller are in the
same ballpark prior to putting the efforts into negotiating or writing up long
agreements. Other investors insist that the best way is to send out complete
offers. They feel as if brokers and sellers appreciate seeing a “real” offer and
that it’s worth the extra effort to write up a formal agreement instead of using
a letter of intent.
Coauthor Peter Harris likes to use letters of intent. Almost all of his deals come
from the nationwide network of relationships and connections that he has. He
feels that if it can’t be put on one page (to start with), it isn’t worth his time.
Coauthor Peter Conti, on the other hand, tends to use formal agreements
with an incredibly long addendum that asks for everything under the sun. If
the addendum comes back completely deleted, Peter knows that the seller
isn’t motivated. When the seller or broker comes back negotiating to remove
some of the outlandish claims that Peter makes in his addendums, he knows
that he has a potential deal brewing.
Letter of intent
A letter of intent should tell the broker and/or owner that you’re a real buyer
who’s ready to close at the price and terms that you’ve spelled out — provided
you can work through the details. Make sure to include this important clause
in your letter of intent:
87Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating
While this letter of intent, once signed, does not legally bind the buyer or
seller, it is expected that both parties will move forward in good faith toward
completing details and signing a Commercial Contract to Buy and Sell real
estate within 10 days of the date this letter is signed.
This clause lets everyone know that your letter of intent is a serious offer and
should be treated as such. The parties are agreeing to move forward toward
completing details. We call this “getting the ball rolling.” Your letter of intent
is like a starter’s gun for the negotiation and agreement process. To see sam-
ples of letters of intent for the various commercial asset types, go to
investorforms.com.
The advantage of using the letter of intent is that it’s a simple, time-efficient
way to get the basic points of a deal down. Besides, a one-page document is
easier to get a seller to agree to right at the time you strike up the deal.
The disadvantage is that you don’t have the property under contract until
you’ve written up a formal agreement. So with all your killer deals, make
sure you write up the official contract pronto!
Commercial contract to buy
and sell real estate
Your commercial broker should have the standard state-approved contract
form that’s commonly used to buy and sell commercial properties. On this
form, which is many pages long, you’ll find all kinds of clauses to cover every
possible situation that might ever come up with your deal. Ask your broker
to give you a copy of this form so that you can get familiar with it.
It’s important that you use the proper state-approved commercial contract to
buy and sell real estate because brokers and agents will be used to seeing it
and will be comfortable with it. Writing up your commercial offer on a form
that brokers aren’t used to seeing is a surefire way to cause a listing broker to
immediately question the seriousness of your offer.
There are certain disadvantages that come up when you use your state-
approved form, however. The biggest drawback is that the approved form
probably has a number of clauses that you don’t necessarily want to have as
part of your deal. Don’t worry, though. You can use a simple addendum to
remove or change any of the language to make it sound exactly like you want
it to. The secret is to put the addendum at the end of the standard contract
so that you can make your changes after the broker and the seller have gone
all the way through all the good, official-sounding stuff. Then at that point
they get to see your addendum that includes a statement like this:
In the event that any of the provisions in this addendum conflict with the
attached commercial contract then in that event the provisions of this
addendum shall prevail . . .
88 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
This language allows you to put whatever you want in the addendum. For
instance, if the official contract says that your agreement isn’t assignable,
you simply add a quick paragraph that says it’s fully assignable to whomever
you want. Pretty cool, huh? Look for addendums you can use at www.
investorforms.com.
You can also use addendums to provide the “outs” in your agreement. This
allows you to tie up a commercial property yet still have time to look it over,
do your due diligence, and make sure it’s a deal that you’re comfortable
moving ahead with.
Another disadvantage of commercial contracts is that they can be fairly large
and may be a little bit intimidating for new investors and sometimes for sell-
ers. Most serious investors use a computer program to fill out their offers so
that they don’t end up with writer’s cramp. (Check out www.commercial
investingsoftware.com for details on investing software.)
Liquidated damages clause
When you’re looking through your state contract, the most important thing
to do is to find out whether there is a liquidated damages clause and whether
it is written in a way that will protect you (as the investor) in the event that
you don’t close on the property. Here’s what a typical liquidated damages
clause says:
If the buyer fails to perform any of the covenants of this contract, all money
paid to Seller by Buyer as aforesaid shall be retained by or for the account
of the Seller as consideration for the execution of this contract and as agreed
liquidated damages and in full settlement of any and all claims for damages.
The liquidated damages clause says that in the event that you don’t close on
the property (which means that you’ve basically defaulted in your agreement
to buy the property), the seller’s only remedy for your failure to buy the
property is to keep whatever money you’ve given to the seller so far.
The advantage of the liquidated damages clause is that it doesn’t really look
like an escape clause. This allows you to make quick close/cash offers with
no obvious escape clauses that a seller may balk at. We use the liquidated
damages clause as an “out” in the deal only in situations where we’ve tied up
the property for a short period of time, such as 30 days or less. Why? We
don’t ever want a seller to feel as if we tied up his property for an unreason-
able time — and then didn’t close.
When we first started investing in commercial property, we used to think
that when you signed an agreement to buy a property that you absolutely
had to close. We soon realized that by using the liquidated damages clause
you could make all kinds of offers, and the only downside was that you’d lose
89Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating
any money that you put into tying up each property. That’s when we devel-
oped Addendum A, which provided clear language so that the sellers were
never surprised when we decided not to close on a property. You can get a
copy of The Addendum A that we use as part of your free Commercial Quick
Start Training Package by registering at www.commercialquickstart.com.
Memorandum of agreement
After your deal is accepted, you’ll want to take one extra step beyond keeping
a copy of the signed agreement. We use a memorandum of agreement that’s
recorded at the courthouse, which lets everyone know that you have the
property under contract. This prevents the seller from selling the property
again. (Sounds crazy, but hey, it happens.) It also prevents another investor
from trying to do an end run around you if you decide to sell your contract
or flip the property.
Presenting Your Offer in the Best Light
At times, it seems that life is going 100 miles per hour. When you call a broker
on the phone or visit her office, she may be racing along getting everything
done that’s on her to-do list. For some people, even when they stop and sit
down with you, their minds can easily continue to race ahead, which means
that you don’t stand a chance of really connecting with them. And if you can’t
properly connect with your broker, you aren’t able to create the rapport and
other elements that are so critical to getting your deal accepted.
The way to break through to the quiet place of attention that you prefer is by
using our scripts. For instance, here’s what you can say if you’re calling your
broker on the phone: “Hi this is Peter Conti. I’m calling about the strip center
on Elm St.” Pause here for two to three seconds (it doesn’t matter if you get a
response or not), and then say “Sounds like I caught you in the middle of
something.” The broker will normally give some excuse like “No, it’s okay. I’m
just clearing off my desk.” However, by calling the broker on her lack of atten-
tion, she’ll likely stop what she’s doing and give you her full attention.
When presenting offers, it’s important to convey a message that the brokers
will understand. As part of becoming an expert commercial real estate
investor, you need to be able to speak about “cap rates,” “the mix,” and
“value added” deals. If you’re new to the commercial real estate field, simply
study and notice the words used by investors (many of which are in this
book). It’s also helpful to talk with your mentor, because chances are that he
or she is already in the loop when it comes to talking like a pro investor. After
you understand the lingo, you can start sprinkling the new “investor language”
into your conversations with brokers.
90 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
The Five-Step Deal Filter
We don’t want you banging your head against a wall trying to seal a deal that
just isn’t going to happen. Use the following five filters to make sure a deal is
worth more of your time.
Filter 1: The five-minute test
To make it through this first step, one of the following things (all of which
indicate a high probability of success) has to happen within the first five
minutes of beginning to look at a deal:
 The seller or broker gives (or hints about) a compelling reason that’s
motivating the owner to sell the property quickly.
 Your number-crunching software tells you that based on the actual num-
bers (or the software’s estimates) the property is priced at or below
market value.
 You become aware of a big upside to the deal, such as knowing that the
current rents are way below market value.
It may seem harsh to judge a deal this quickly, but you have to remember
that there are thousands of opportunities to buy commercial properties. So,
your time and energy must stay focused on deals with the highest probability
of success.
Filter 2: Sign it up!
If the deal you’re analyzing passes through the first filter, you should move
quickly to get the deal under contract by using forms that will allow you to
get out of the deal without any cost besides your time. Why do we encourage
you to be in such a hurry to sign up the deal? Because good deals don’t last.
If it really is a good deal, you need to move on it before someone else snatches
it up. The other reason is that getting a deal under contract — even if the price
and terms aren’t perfect — gives you the green light to move ahead with the
next steps.
It seems that people are so afraid of risk that they hesitate to sign up a deal
until they know for sure it’s going to be a great deal. We’re here to tell you
that it’s rare to find a deal that you know for sure will be great at sign up time.
Great deals simply don’t wait for you to process through days and days of
analysis or contemplation.
91Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating
One of the first things you need to have in your investing arsenal is a set of
forms and contracts that you use on a consistent basis. This keeps you from
having to spend hours of your time and from spending money with your
attorney every time you negotiate a deal. In fact, you’ll probably end up with
your own version of agreements. These will likely be a combination of other
investors’ forms, your own changes, and your attorney’s tweaks. Research
www.investingforms.com to come up with a number of options to use.
When using escape clauses that allow you to get out of a deal, make sure you
not only have the right language in your agreement, but that you also use the
right language when talking to the broker and/or the owner. That way they
aren’t unpleasantly surprised when you exercise the rights that the contract
gives you. Go to this book’s companion Web site, www.CommercialQuick
Start.com, to hear a podcast of a sample script that we use. With this
sample, you can listen to the language, the tone, and the timing that we
use so that sellers and brokers understand the escape clauses without
being alarmed about them
Filter 3: The quick view
The quick view filter is designed to help you determine whether the property
is worth the time it will take to do the real due diligence required in the next
filter. Remember: We don’t start this step until we have the property under
contract. The quick view for commercial property requires you to check two
important numbers:
 Check the purchase price as it relates to the true market value of the
property in its “as is” condition. This view helps you determine
whether you have equity.
Using your connections with brokers and property managers in the area,
find out and enter these variables into your number-crunching software
to help determine the estimated value of the property:
• The market cap rate
• The average price per unit for apartments
• The average price per square foot for land, office, or retail
properties
 Check the market rents for comparable properties in the area. Doing
so tells you whether the property value can be increased by raising
rents over time.
You’re doing a fast-and-dirty quick view in this step to see if the property has
an upside. At this point, you aren’t trying to see exactly what the property is
worth. So expect to make some estimates and assumptions here with the com-
fort that this isn’t the final filter for your deals. If the property looks like it may
be priced under market, or the rents appear to be low, move to the next step.
92 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Filter 4: The “realists” check
This filter is all about preparing for due diligence (flip to Chapter 6 for a full
explanation of this important task.) This is the time to look at the deal from a
fresh perspective to make sure that the numbers really do make sense. Be
sure to begin this step after that first blush of initial excitement has worn off.
You want to make sure that the deal really is a keeper.
Here are some questions to ask:
 Is the price really right?
 What assumptions am I making in my forecasts and projections?
 What realistically can go wrong with them?
 How will these setbacks affect me?
 How would I handle the setbacks?
 Can I build a safety mechanism into the deal to handle this contingency?
 If not, am I really willing to live with the risk?
 If I had no time in this deal and no psychological commitment to see this
deal happen (and knowing what I know now), would I move forward in
this deal?
 Can I handle the consequences of this deal not working out?
The bottom line is that this is your chance to check your assumptions and
make sure that you’re making an intelligent and balanced decision. After
you’re confident that you’re making a rational decision to move ahead, you
can start going through your due diligence checklist (checking the title to the
property, ordering inspections, reviewing leases, and so on).
When you’re going through the reality filter stage, the single most important
thing you need to do is to neutralize your emotions and check your assump-
tions. You can neutralize your emotions by realizing that everyone makes
decisions emotionally — everyone. Remember the old saying, “When emo-
tions goes up, intelligence goes down.” You just need to bring your emotional
biases onto the table so that you’re aware of them. Then examine the deal
alongside these biases. You’ll make a much better, more balanced decision
by checking your assumptions against the facts.
Filter 5: End users determine the value
You can do all the fancy analysis you want. You can even create spreadsheet
after to spreadsheet “proving” that the deal is a winner. But if you can’t sell,
hold long term, or flip your commercial property, the deal is a bust.
93Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating
You need to get real data from real buyers and commercial tenants (the end
users for the property). The only way to really know that you have real data —
and not just fluff — is to ask prospective buyers if they’re willing to buy or
prospective tenants if they’re willing to lease your property.
This may sound a bit crazy to be trying to sell or lease a property while you
just have it under contract, but in the 27 combined years we’ve been invest-
ing, we’ve discovered that the very best way to know that you did a poor job
negotiating a purchase is when you’re struggling to resell or lease out the
property. Why not find this out ahead of time?
Don’t be guilty of the cardinal sin of waiting to market your property until
you close on it. Immediately start aggressively marketing the property to see
what kind of interest you can develop. Strong interest from willing buyers or
commercial tenants is your best insurance that the deal is a keeper.
The Seller Has Accepted
My Offer! Now What?
You’re ecstatic: The seller accepted your offer and it’s all that you wanted
and more! What do you do now? Here are the five most important steps that
you need to take after your offer is accepted (and you’ve celebrated!):
94 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
When the owner goes shopping with your offer
One of the reasons that you want to create a
strong connection and rapport with the broker
and the owner is to prevent them from unfairly
“shopping” your offer.
Shopping an offer occurs
when a broker or owner calls all the other
investors who have had any interest or made
lower offers on the property and says “Hey, the
property is about to go under contract unless
you hurry and get us an offer.” You may even run
across situations where the other investors are
allowed to know some of the elements of your
offer. Here are two ways to prevent the seller
from shopping your offer:
 Make sure that you leave enough time for
the seller to get your offer, but not much
more. For instance, we’ve made offers on a
Thursday afternoon that expire on a Friday
at 5 p.m.
 Get an agreement from the broker that he
won’t share any details of your offer,
including the fact that you have made an
offer. We use a one-page form called the
“Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure
Agreement” to prevent this. See www.
investingforms.com for this form
and others.
1. Record a memorandum of agreement (which is covered earlier in the
chapter).
2. Begin your due diligence (Chapter 6).
3. Come up with three to five exit strategies (see the nearby sidebar).
4. Move ahead with lining up the financing (Chapters 8–10).
95Chapter 5: Strategies for Making Offers and Negotiating
What’s your exit strategy?
One of the biggest mistakes that investors make
when involved in big deals is not creating the
contingency plans needed to make money no
matter what happens in a deal. In other words,
understand this: The single most important way
you can control risk in a deal is to have multiple,
carefully planned-out exit strategies so that you
make money no matter what.
For example, imagine that you’re buying a 156-
unit apartment building on the edge of a reviving
downtown. You’re buying the property with the
intention of turning it into a rental property. But
what happens if you find that the property is dif-
ficult to keep as rental property? What are your
contingency plans?
One option would be to convert the units into
condos and reap a huge premium over the next
12 to 24 months as you sold off the individual
units to conventional cash buyers. This option
would provide a maximum amount of cash to
you in a short period of time. Or, if you had trou-
ble selling enough of the units with conventional
financing, you could offer 30 percent of the
condos with seller financing in the form of a
large seller second mortgage. You then help
these buyers get a new loan for 75 to 90 percent
of the purchase price (and because they’re
owner-occupied loans and in a lower price
range, they should be easier to get.) You carry
back the balance as a higher interest rate
second mortgage with interest-only payments
due monthly. Or you can let the interest accrue
and compound.
The key is to make sure that you have thought
through at least five solid exit strategies for how
to handle the most likely contingencies before
you move forward in the deal. This extra effort
on your part will pay off handsomely not only in
extra profits from deals, but also in the peace of
mind you’ll gain in knowing that you made smart
decisions to buy a property.
96 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Chapter 6
Due Diligence: Doing
Your Homework
In This Chapter
 Getting the lowdown on due diligence
 Understanding what needs to be done
 Using checklists to be successful in due diligence
 Going through the due diligence process
 Making your way to the closing table
Okay, so you’ve a signed contract — now what? Well, we highly suggest
that you get busy figuring out if the property is a good, bad, or average
deal and whether you want to buy it. A signed contract usually contains a
clause, called a due diligence clause, that allows you to check out the property
for free for a period of time, usually 30 to 60 days. Let’s face it, sometimes
sellers and owners stretch the truth about their properties when it comes
down to how much money they bring in, their monthly expenses, their prior
repairs, the future repairs needed, and how well the properties have been
operating. Luckily, the due diligence clause allows you the chance to do your
homework and discover the nitty-gritty on a property so that you can make
an informed decision on whether to buy or not.
In this chapter, you find out how to perform due diligence, what tools you
need to do a good job, how to manage the whole process, what safeguards
you need to protect yourself while under contract, what paperwork you need
to verify, what to watch out for when you inspect the property, what to do if
you find problems (and you will), and plenty more.
What Is Due Diligence?
Due diligence is the process of “doing your homework” on the property that
you’re thinking about buying as an investment. It’s the process of checking,
double-checking, and confirming any important information that was used to
determine whether the property is a good, average, or bad deal.
Proper due diligence takes persistence and weeks to accomplish. And remem-
ber that due diligence isn’t used as an excuse to back out of a deal; it’s pri-
marily a means to protect you financially and legally. In your typical purchase
contract, you find a clause that says either “due diligence period” or “inspec-
tion period.” What property items you’ll be able to inspect and how many
days of due diligence you have are stated in that contract clause as well.
During this time, you want to verify many different pieces of information,
including the following:
 Rents, leases, and any other income
 Any and all expenses related to the property
 Any defects in the physical condition of the property’s interior and
exterior
 Possible environmental problems on or surrounding the property
 Building code violations
 Any service and vendor contracts
 Existing warranties
 Local police reports
 Any liens placed against the property, such as loans, back taxes, or judg-
ments or anything else that stands in the way of transferring ownership
If, after digging into all this information, you find something wrong with the
property, you should go back to the owner and renegotiate.
There’s usually no charge for you to perform due diligence, but you’ll likely
have to hire either a professional inspection company or an accountant (or
maybe both), and this expense can run several thousands of dollars. But
before you spend any money, we suggest that you follow the tips in the later
section, “The First Things You Need to Do.”
Proper due diligence enables you to uncover potential problems with the
property (or as we call them, “elephants underneath the carpet”) before the
deal is closed. These potential problems can be very costly and can quickly
turn a good deal into a bad one. Any experienced real estate investor knows
and understands the importance of completing due diligence tasks.
98 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Making due diligence a team effort
In due diligence, you’re the detective. You want the truth and nothing but the
truth. And think about it: Detectives that solve cases usually have the best
team of specialists to help them obtain information to build their cases. So it
is with you, the investor, to build your case for the purchase of a property.
Due diligence can be broken up into three main specialized parts: physical,
financial, and legal. We explain each of these parts in the following sections.
And later in this chapter, we give you a detailed due diligence checklist that
breaks out each specialized physical, financial, and legal task.
We suggest that you hire third-party companies and specialists to do the
more complex tasks in your due diligence. In fact, you can hire companies
that complete the entire due diligence process for you. Or you can hire the
different specialists individually.
Physical inspection
For the physical part of due diligence, where you actually walk around and
inspect outside and inside the property, you should hire a professional
inspection company. We believe that the physical part is the most important
of the three because these types of mistakes are the most costly to correct
and are the most damaging to the property’s long-term value.
The best way to find a property inspection specialist is through a referral by
an individual or a company that has experience with this part of due diligence.
You can also ask your local commercial real estate broker for a referral. If you
have no luck there, try entering the key word “commercial property inspec-
tion” into your favorite search engine. A handful of sites is bound to pop up.
Financial investigation
When it comes to the financial part of due diligence, we suggest that you be
advised by an accountant who has real estate investment experience.
Accountants aren’t all created equal. Qualify your accountant by verifying
that he or she has commercial real estate accounting experience, not just
single-family residence accounting experience or general business experi-
ence. In some cases, the investment you’re considering may be one of your
largest. Would you trust the advice of an accountant with little experience in
one of your largest financial endeavors ever? We didn’t think so. By far, the
best way to find a qualified accountant is by referral. Call on one of your
investment buddies and check out who they’re using. And again, make sure
that referral has commercial real estate accounting experience.
99Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework
Here’s a tip to stand on: Don’t believe any financial information or books and
records given to you by the seller. Double-check everything. Turn things
inside out and hold each financial statement up to the light for proof. We rec-
ommend that you get deeply involved in the financial aspect of due diligence.
Verify each dollar of income reportedly coming in and verify every dollar
reportedly spent on the property by reviewing actual billing receipts.
Legal inquiries
The legal side of due diligence is most often done by an attorney and aided
by a reputable title/escrow company. These folks look at things such as the
following:
 Defects on the title and survey
 Any potential environmental problems
 Proper and improper special uses and encroachments that affect the
property
These are all potential deal killers.
Be sure to have tenant leases thoroughly reviewed and audited. After all,
when you buy a commercial property, you’re essentially buying the leases
and the property comes for free! Contracts imposed on the property, such as
employment contracts, service contracts, and warranties, all need to be
scoured over with a fine-toothed comb.
All attorneys are not created equal. Attorneys specialize in areas of law. Please
don’t have a family law attorney represent you when purchasing a large shop-
ping center. That’s like having a foot doctor give you an eye examination.
Instead, hire a real estate attorney. The real estate attorney that you hire
doesn’t have to be local, but needs to be familiar with laws in the state in
which the property is located.
As for selecting a title/escrow company, that’s a little easier than selecting an
attorney. Title and escrow companies, by law, are neutral parties; they can
neither favor the buyer nor the seller (nor the real estate agent). If you enter
the key words “commercial title companies” into your favorite search engine,
you’ll get a few to start with. We find it advantageous, however, to work with
an office that’s local and is familiar with closing practices of that city or state.
Getting to the truth about due diligence
Performing due diligence is about attaining and understanding the truth
about an investment. It’s more than just reviewing documents and walking
through a building. Here are some truths to consider as you go through the
due diligence process:
100 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
 Due diligence is about more than just completing certain tasks (which
we outline in the preceding section). It’s also about having the right
attitude. Having a Type A personality (detailed, driven, and aggressive)
during the due diligence process is a good thing.
 Due diligence will cost you several thousands of dollars and could
take several weeks (if not months) to thoroughly complete. Don’t be
afraid to spend plenty of time and money during the due diligence
process. Doing so allows you to really study the property and alleviate
the butterflies that you get when jumping into a new deal. And remem-
ber the old adage that says, “It’s expensive being cheap.”
 Deal making is glamorous; due diligence is not (so don’t expect it to
be). Because due diligence is no fun and doesn’t always feel like a worth-
while activity, you may have to force yourself to bite the bullet and dive
in. Literally every document concerning the property and its operation
must be examined. Rolling up your sleeves and staying up to the wee
hours studying property statements is the norm — not the exception —
when doing a thorough job with your due diligence.
 Due diligence actually starts in contract negotiations. Make sure the
seller knows upfront exactly what you’re going to be asking for. Otherwise,
we guarantee that you’ll have trouble getting to the closing table. Check
out the due diligence checklists we provide in the later section, “Creating
Checklists for Effective Due Diligence,” and you’ll understand why.
 The seller is guilty until proven innocent. Don’t believe seller-provided
information right off the bat. You have to cross-check it first. We would
like to believe that most sellers are honest like us. But some sellers tell
stories and stretch the truth.
 Never use the inspection company that a seller recommends. An
inspector that gets business from the seller’s side will likely be biased
and will see to it that the deal goes through (that way they can get fur-
ther referrals). The moral of this story? Find and hire your own property
inspector.
 Be wary of any tactic the seller uses to avoid inspections. The seller
may want to hurry you through your due diligence process. If the seller
is pushing you, it may mean that he or she wants you to overlook some-
thing. Take your time. Also, don’t fall for the seller-provided inspection
report. Sellers use this as a way of “saving you time and money.”
Yeah right.
 Be present. What’s the opposite of being present? Absent! The conse-
quences of being absent during your due diligence are not good. Free
yourself of distractions, late-night parties, and whatever else may keep
you from focusing on due diligence tasks. One mistake can cost you
dearly, so be in the moment and be present.
101Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework
The First Things You Need to Do
In the case of commercial real estate investing, it’s okay to shoot first and ask
questions later. Before you go spending your time, money, and energy on due
diligence, you first need to get control of the property by putting it under
contract. Because thorough due diligence costs several thousands of dollars
and involves many days of hard work, make sure it’s a deal worth going after.
The following are some things you can do after you’re under contract but
before you spend any money or significant amount of time:
 Scope out the property
 Get a title commitment
 Crunch the numbers
After you complete the tasks outlined in the next three sections, it’s gut-check
time. Based on the information you obtained from your initial check of the
property, answer this question: “Is this deal still good enough for me to pull
the trigger, get out my checkbook, and continue on to the next phase of due
diligence? Or should I pull the plug and go back to the drawing board?”
Scope out the property
When we say scope out the property, we mean just that: Go look at it. Examine
it to make sure that the property isn’t falling down or in an undesirable loca-
tion. In some cases, sellers may require you to put the property under contract
before you can perform this run-through. These sellers may simply want you
to show that you’re serious about the property by putting your best foot for-
ward with a contract. That’s okay.
A more efficient way of checking out the property is to have a previously
selected property manager perform a drive-by and report a “thumbs up” or
“thumbs down” on the property’s physical appearance and location. This
way, you’re using what we call “O.P.T.” (other people’s time).
Get a title commitment
After giving the property a quick once-over, present the property address to a
title company and order a title commitment. Before issuing a title commitment,
the title company will do a title search. This search will disclose if there are
any ownership issues with the property such as liens, encumbrances, ease-
ments, access problems, or restrictions. Court orders, divorce decrees, and
probate issues may even pop up. With the title commitment, you’re making
sure that the sellers can actually convey the property’s title to you.
102 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
If the title commitment problems can’t be overcome in a timely manner, you
may want to pass and move on. Otherwise you may run into problems later
on in the process. For example, with one of our apartment deals, we got to
the day of closing only to find out that the seller wasn’t authorized, by him-
self, to sell the property. He tried to sell the property without his family’s
approval.
Look at the property’s numbers
Here’s the fun part, where you get to see how much money you’ll be making.
The seller will provide you with the property’s numbers on which you can
base your investment objectives. Due diligence here will enable you to see if
the property makes a ton of money or is a money pit. Crunch the property’s
numbers with the seller-provided income and expense statements (after they
have been cross-checked, of course).
If you’re just starting out, we suggest that you get the advice of a real-estate-
savvy accountant. Or find someone who has been successful and is willing
to show you the basics of number crunching. However, after going through a
few deal evaluations, you can probably do this number crunching yourself.
Chapter 3 tells you how the experts do it.
When you ask for the seller-provided info, you may get the following two sets
of statements:
 Proforma: Most proformas will list the income, expenses, and cash flows.
You should be quite leery of proforma statements because these are
simply the seller’s best-case scenario or “perfect-world” financial projec-
tions. These projections are often unattainable in the real world. In other
words, these reports may stretch the truth a bit to shed a positive light
on the property.
 Actuals: The actuals are the statements that you really want. This infor-
mation tells how the property actually performed or is performing
today. To get a true property performance indication, complete your
financial evaluation based on these figures.
If the proforma evaluation is far from your actuals evaluation, ask yourself
this question: “Can you reasonably bridge the gap between the two?” In other
words, do you have the vision or capability to take the property from where
it is today to where you would like it to be in the future. If the answer is yes,
go ahead and proceed. If the answer is no, you may want to do further
research and decide whether to continue.
103Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework
Creating Checklists for
Effective Due Diligence
In the earlier section, “Making due diligence a team effort,” we break down the
due diligence process into three specialized parts: physical, financial, and
legal. In this section, we discuss the must-dos of each aspect.
The simple checklists that we provide in this section are going to be your
very best friends when it comes to not missing a single step of your due dili-
gence. The items on each of these checklists are to be asked for and obtained
within your due diligence period. And remember that sometimes the most
obvious things are the easiest to overlook. So don’t just read through the lists
and think that you can remember everything on them. Instead, use the lists
we’ve created as a template for your own checklists that you can tweak and
improve over time. Check them off as you complete them. We know from per-
sonal experience that you become sharper, if not more at ease with due dili-
gence, as you examine more properties.
Physical due diligence checklist
When investors think of physical due diligence, they often only think of an
actual walk-through of the property with an inspector. Walk-throughs are a
part of physical due diligence, but only a tiny part of it. You have quite a bit
more to think about and do. For instance, ask the seller for the following
items:
 Site plans and specifications: This group of documents includes all the
construction documents, building plans and schematics, floor plans, and
land use documents. These docs provide a road map of the property’s
inspection for when it was first built, how it was built, and for what
purpose.
 Photos of the property: Photos of the exteriors, interiors, and the sur-
rounding land and structures should be taken. Digital aerial photogra-
phy is widely available and aids in showing the placement of property
within neighborhoods and in between highways. Having photos allows
you to start putting together the pieces of the puzzle and knowing what’s
in your vicinity can only help you in determining what obstacles you
may be facing now or in the future.
 A structural inspection: Inspect the walls, roofs, and foundation, and
make sure there are implements in place for earthquake safety. This
inspection counts as the exterior and interior inspection. Allow a profes-
sional inspection company to guide you in this inspection.
104 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
 An interior systems inspection: Inspect the interior of the property for
wear and tear, including items such as doors, doorways, windows, and
weatherproofing. Then inquire about the age of the roof, any building
code violations, government compliance (such as physically impaired
requirements), and site improvements.
 A mechanical and electrical inspection: Make sure that every mechani-
cal and electrical system is inspected. Such systems include heating,
ventilation, air conditioning, plumbing systems, and all electrical power
systems and controls.
 A list of capital improvements performed: Obtain receipts and docu-
mentation of any capital improvements that were made over the last five
years. This documentation will help with the clarity and assessment of
the physical inspection and allow you to project when parts of the prop-
erty may need repairing or replacement within the next few years.
 A pest inspection: On some types of buildings, an inspection for pests,
such as termites, may take place. Most apartment buildings have this
inspection done as part of a lender requirement. If termites are found,
the building is chemically treated.
Hiring inspection professionals to undertake the engineering side of your due
diligence requires some skill in itself. Hire from reputable companies that
specifically inspect the type of property that you’re considering. Check out
their licenses and certifications as well. Get recent references from the com-
pany and look for happy and satisfied customers. You should interview at
least three companies and ask for sample inspection reports from each before
making a final decision. Enter “commercial property inspection” into your
favorite search engine to find a few companies to get started.
Financial due diligence checklist
The financial aspect of due diligence focuses on why you’re buying the prop-
erty. It helps ensure that you make money by verifying the seller records of
the property’s financial performance. To perform thorough financial due dili-
gence, be sure to obtain the following from the seller:
 Income and expense statements: These statements show what the seller
has collected in income from the tenants as well as what the owner spent
in operating the property. You should at least obtain annual income and
expense statements for the past three years. Also, get all of last year’s
monthly profit and loss statements and review the balance sheet for the
past three years. These documents can be obtained from the seller. After
you have all this information, complete your financial evaluation on the
property to ensure that it produces the type of returns that you expect
or desire.
105Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework
 Rent rolls: A rent roll is essentially an attendance sheet for all the ten-
ants. It displays the tenant name, unit space or square footage, amount
of rent paid, move-in date, lease expiration date, and security deposit.
When you have the rent roll, verify the rent amounts with those given on
the lease agreements. Also, add the total income of the rent rolls and
compare that with the income and expense statements amount. If you
notice any discrepancy here, put up a red flag and investigate further.
 Tax returns: Obtain the property’s tax returns for the past three years. If
there’s a single owner, you only need to review that return. If the prop-
erty is operating under a partnership agreement, you need to get every
partner’s tax return for the property. Add up all the income and expenses
shown on the tax returns. These numbers should match those from the
property’s income and expense statements. If they don’t, ask yourself a
question: “Which would you believe? The IRS tax returns or documents
that the seller produced?” Crunch your numbers again and see if the
property still produces an acceptable return for you. If the discrepancy
is in your favor, that’s okay, but if it’s not, you may have to renegotiate
the terms of the deal to meet your objectives.
 Lease agreements: A lease agreement can be a complex legal document.
We suggest allowing someone who has expertise with that type of lease
do the auditing for you. If all the leases are the same, such as in an apart-
ment building, have an attorney review the first few to make sure that
they’re valid. For every other category of commercial real estate, we
suggest verifying the leases by using an estoppel letter. This letter con-
firms that the lease is true and accurate and is the only agreement that’s
made between the tenant and the owner.
Pay strict attention to the expiration of the leases of each tenant. What if
a good portion of the tenant leases expire next year? Do you have the
financial strength to carry the property while it’s being filled up again
(which can take several months)? For the tenants that have upcoming
expirations, do you have the right to renegotiate the leases even if you
aren’t the owner yet?
 Utility bills: Obtain the past two years’ worth of actual utility bills for
the property. These bills include electricity, gas, water, sewer, trash, tele-
phone, cable, and Internet service bills. Compare the totals of each util-
ity category to the seller’s total given on the expense statements. If the
numbers don’t match, put up a red flag. Reevaluate the numbers and see
if the deal is still worth making.
 Property tax bills: Obtain the past two years’ worth of property tax
bills. Verify the amounts with those given on the seller’s expense state-
ments. Again, if the numbers don’t match, put up a red flag and investi-
gate the discrepancy. Reevaluate to see if it’s still a good deal. Also, call
the tax assessor’s office and find out how the property will be reassessed
and how often after you become the owner. It’s a good idea to figure this
106 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
property tax increase into your expense calculations as the new owner.
It also varies from state to state. For example, in California the tax rate is
roughly 1 percent of the sales price, but in Texas, the tax rate is about 3
percent of 80 percent of the purchase price.
Getting assistance for the financial portion of your due diligence is critical if
you’re just starting out. As mentioned in the checklist, leases can be complex
and they’re extremely important. So, you can’t be lax. Until your skill level
increases at deciphering income and expense statements, we recommend
having a more experienced investor or mentor review them along with you.
And as for hiring an accountant to review any of the financial documents and
tax plan for you, make sure he or she has relevant real estate work experi-
ence. A lot of times we discover that being book smart in crunching numbers
and tax planning just doesn’t cut it. Pay for good experienced help. You owe
it to yourself and to your future with this property.
Legal due diligence checklist
Legal due diligence can be pretty extensive, and checking on the items in this
list takes a team effort. But, from experience, we know that it gets easier as
you go. When you begin to understand the importance of the many docu-
ments and the ins and outs of each, you can cut to the chase really quickly.
Here are the items that you need to ask the seller for:
 An environmental inspection: The environmental inspection most often
used is called a Phase I Environment Site Assessment. During this
inspection, the inspector explores the past use of the property and the
surrounding area, looking for onsite and offsite environmental problems
and liabilities. Phase I reports cost in the thousands of dollars and are
very involved timewise, so plan ahead if you want one or if the lender
requires one. Keep in mind that every seller won’t necessarily have one
lying around either.
This inspection can help answer questions like these: Does the property
contain any hazardous materials? Is the property close to any endan-
gered or protected animals or wildlife? Has asbestos been used in any of
the construction? Is there an underground storage tank? These environ-
mental issues are expensive to cure and can be potential deal-killers, so
be sure to schedule an inspection if needed.
Make sure you really take the time to read the environmental report. If
you don’t understand everything, find someone who does and ask him
or her to explain it to you. Just because the lender is willing to loan you
money doesn’t mean that the property is free of potential problems. Find
out now or pay later.
107Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework
 A survey and title inspection: With this inspection, a title company can
verify the property size and that the title report has the same descrip-
tion as the survey. With this inspection you’ll also review any liens,
judgements, easements, or encroachments on the property that could
drastically affect its value and use. If the title has any issues, it must
be delivered “clear” by the seller before closing.
 An inspection for building code violations: Some of the most common
violations you might run into with this inspection include unauthorized
construction, non-city approved improvements, or substandard electri-
cal or plumbing work. If a violation occurs after a building is built, it may
be considered a nonconforming use and is considered to be grandfathered
in. Going to the city’s planning department’s records will clarify this.
 The zoning code: Every property has a specific use permitted. For
example, a property can be zoned as residential or commercial. So, you
need to review the city’s zoning ordinances to make sure that the prop-
erty’s use complies with what it’s legally zoned for. If it’s used illegally,
the property can be shut down. Lenders will not loan on a property
that’s being used for what it’s not permitted for.
 The insurance policy: The property’s insurance policy can be a treasure
trove of information if you can get the claim history. The property’s
claim history will tell you if the property has experienced fires, flooding,
lapses of coverage, or policy cancellations.
In addition to getting a copy of the policy from the seller, it’s highly rec-
ommended to begin your own search for insurance quotes. It can take
up to 30 days in some cases just to get quotes. Get at least three, and
then shop and compare. Don’t be afraid to negotiate for the best pricing
either, as commercial insurance is a very competitive business.
 Licenses, permits, or certificates: Some of these items are necessary
to operate a business, so make sure to get them from the seller. If not,
check with the city to see what’s required to operate your property.
Oftentimes you’re required to post business licenses, permits, or certifi-
cates. Make sure that you’re proactive in notification of new ownership
to avoid hefty fines.
 Service and vendor contracts: Review all service and vendor contracts
to make sure that you have the right to choose or discontinue the ser-
vices. These types of services may include, among others, maintenance,
landscaping, or laundry. Review and keep records of any equipment war-
ranties and guarantees.
 A personal property inventory: Obtain a list of all personal property
items, such as equipment, tools, computers, furniture, supplies, and
appliances that are to remain behind with you, the new owner. Document
all these personal items in writing or consider them gone. In most trans-
actions, you use a Bill of Sale form to document the personal property
items to be transferred. Check your purchase contract as to how per-
sonal items are accounted for and transferred.
108 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
 Any police reports: Determine past and current police reports by call-
ing the local police department. Review the type and frequency of calls
to the property. Know what’s going on before you buy. You should even
do some of you own police work. Show up to the property at 9:00 p.m. and
park your car in a spot with good visibility until 11:00 p.m. Observe what
goes on for those 2 hours. Is it peaceful? Is it party time? Did you witness
possible illegal activities? Know what’s going on before you buy.
Managing the Whole Process
The due diligence process is a long one. It’s like a tape measure that shows
stuff to do every inch along the way. Sometimes it can seem like it will never
end, and so it requires good time management and a great deal of focus. But
don’t worry, when broken down into bite-sized pieces, the process can be
managed successfully. As for organizing the whole process, we recommend
that you organize yourself much like a project manager would — with project
task lists and project deadlines. We guide you in the following sections.
Opening an escrow
Let’s say that you have a signed contract and you’re ready to begin due dili-
gence. The first thing you should do is open an escrow with an escrow com-
pany or title company. (In some states, an attorney will act as the escrow
holder and perform those duties as well.) The escrow company is an unbi-
ased and neutral party to the buyer and seller. It handles all the money and
relevant documents that pertain to the transferring of ownership and closing
of the deal.
To open an escrow, simply go to an escrow company (or an attorney that per-
forms escrow services) and request that it handle your escrow for a property
sale. And don’t forget to bring along your signed purchase contract. When
choosing a company to handle your escrow, ask a real estate broker or a
fellow investor for a referral. A seasoned and hardworking escrow officer can
make all the difference when things get hairy, especially during the last few
days of closing.
After you’re set with your new escrow, you can expect the escrow company
to do the following tasks:
 Prepare preliminary escrow instructions: The escrow instructions tell
the escrow officer what to do in order to close the deal with the buyer
and seller.
109Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework
Mistakes on the preliminary (and even on the final) escrow instructions
are common, so check the math and check for accurate figures. You’ll
see many fees listed — understand each one. If you don’t understand
something, stop and question it.
 Receive the earnest money deposit: An earnest money deposit, which is
also called a good-faith deposit, shows your intent to purchase the prop-
erty in good faith.
 Order a preliminary title report: This report tells you who the actual
owner of the property is as well as what loans or liens are currently on
the property.
 Order a certified survey: This survey is ordered from a surveyor who
goes to the property to verify the legal street address, its block, lot
number, and subdivision.
 Request payoffs from lenders or lien holders: The lenders and lien
holders will request payoffs so they can see how much is owed and to
whom to pay off at closing.
 Receive all reports pertaining to the closing: The type of reports that
the escrow company receives includes termite reports and deferred
maintenance inspection reports.
 Record the title to the buyer after closing: This is the actual transfer of
legal ownership from the seller to the buyer.
 Finalize and close the escrow: To finalize the escrow, the company pays
off all loans and liens, delivers all closing documents, and pays the seller
his proceeds.
Getting a preliminary title report
The title of a property is the legal evidence of rightful ownership and is given
in the form of a deed. So, after you have an opened escrow, the escrow or
title company officer will order you a preliminary title report. Preliminary
reports are thorough evaluations of public records of the ownership chain or
“chain of title” for the property. They’re based on information that has been
gathered by the title company over the course of many years. You can expect
to receive your report within three to five days. In this report, you find the
general history of the property’s ownership as well as loans, liens, or encum-
brances placed on the property by other parties.
If the title has problems, it can’t be transferred to you at closing. In other
words, each title problem must be resolved by the seller and escrow com-
pany before closing can occur. So it’s important to order and review the pre-
liminary title report early, because the owner then has time to take care of
the problems while everyone works toward closing.
110 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Here are some red flags to watch for on your preliminary title reports:
 Improper authorization: Make sure that the person who signed on the
contract is authorized to do so and has the ability to actually sell the
property to you. In other words, make sure that the person who signed
the contract is the owner or can verify that he represents the owner.
 Unsatisfied mortgages: An unsatisfied mortgage can occur either because
the seller has an outstanding mortgage on the property or because a
previous mortgage wasn’t recorded properly as paid and then removed.
 Property tax liens: If a seller is behind on paying the property real
estate taxes, we suggest you arrange for the owner to pay them before
closing or renegotiate the terms of the deal, especially if you end up
paying for them.
 Mechanics liens: In the case of mechanics liens, the seller didn’t pay for
contractor services performed on the property, so the contractor has a
lien against the property for payment.
 Judgment liens: If you come across a judgment lien, you know that the
seller has been a party to a lawsuit and a judgment has been awarded
against him and the property.
 Leases: Here the seller is under a lease agreement for either equipment
or a service and the property is used as security for the lease.
 Easements: If the seller has easements, that means he’s granted the right
to use another person’s land for a stated purpose, such as the right to
travel across a property owned by another person. This becomes a red
flag to new owners who thought they could use the property exclusively
for themselves.
Don’t get too worried about having to be an expert at reading preliminary
reports. Your escrow officer and real estate attorney can pick up on the red
flags. Your main task is to follow up with the seller to get these red flags
addressed within the due diligence time period.
The preliminary title report then becomes the final title report, on which title
insurance is based. Title insurance is an insurance policy that covers the title
of a property if for any reason problems appear on your title after closing.
The buyer has the right to approve or disapprove the preliminary title report
and back out of the deal unless the seller can provide a clean title by elimi-
nating certain exceptions to the title before closing. But the buyer will only
have a short period of time, as stated in the purchase contract, during which to
act on the preliminary title report. So it’s extremely important for a buyer
to carefully review a preliminary title report immediately and to take appro-
priate action if any red flags appear.
111Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework
Keeping an eye on contingencies
A key component to your purchase contract’s due diligence process and to
protecting yourself while under contract is the contingency clause. This
clause is also sometimes called a “subject to” or “escape” clause. Basically,
these clauses make your purchase of the property contingent upon some-
thing happening.
For example, most purchases are contingent upon the buyer inspecting the
property and approving of its condition prior to closing. Another example
may be that the purchase is contingent upon the buyer getting approved for
a loan for the property. In both cases, if the buyer doesn’t like the condition
of the property or can’t get approved for a loan, she may back out of the deal.
That’s the good side of contingencies — the side that protects you, the buyer.
Here’s the flip side, however: Purchase contracts state how much time you
have to perform due diligence duties. The amount of time usually ranges
between 30 to 45 days. If you fail to perform those duties or don’t reply to the
seller concerning those items within the time period, you automatically waive
your rights to those contingencies and they’re considered “removed” from
the purchase contract. After the contingencies are removed, the earnest
money you put into the escrow becomes nonrefundable and belongs to the
seller if you back out of the deal. So be sure that you pay strict attention to
every contingency clause and its time periods during due diligence.
Negligence can cost you thousands of dollars and a mean headache.
Check out these commonly used contingencies:
 Financing contingency: This contingency makes your purchase contin-
gent upon getting financing for the property. Usually the contract states
that you have 5 to 10 days to apply for financing through a lender, and
then you have a total of 30 to 45 days to get approved for a loan. If you
get approved for financing within the contingency time period, you
simply contact the seller in writing that you have been approved for
financing and that you’re hereby removing this contingency from the
contract.
After you waive this contingency, your earnest deposit becomes nonre-
fundable. So, if you don’t get approved or can’t find acceptable financing,
make sure that you notify the seller within your contingency time period
so you can get out of the deal and have your earnest money returned
to you.
 Inspection contingency: Usually this contingency involves two inspec-
tions: a physical inspection of the property and a financial and business
inspection of the property’s books and records. For the physical inspec-
tion, you basically hire a professional inspection company to walk the
property and report to you on the overall condition of the property.
During the financial and business inspection you review, among other
112 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
things, income/expense statements, leases, rent rolls, and service con-
tracts. And typically you have 30 days to complete this contingency.
Again, if your results tell you that you should get out of the deal, do so
within the contingency time period so that you get your earnest money
returned.
 Title contingency: This contingency, which usually has a due diligence
time period of 7 to 14 days, allows you to make sure that the title is
cleaned up before closing. For example, let’s say that a seller was behind
in her property tax payments and also failed to pay her contractor for
some roof work that was completed. Both parties can file a lien against
the property to “cloud” the title and stop the closing from happening
until both parties are paid.
 Appraisal contingency: This contingency can help you get out of a bind
where there are differences in appraisal and purchase price amounts.
For example, if the lender says that the property is only worth or has
been appraised for $750,000, but your purchase price is $1,000,000, you
have a problem. You’re coming up $250,000 short. You have three
choices here. Take $250,000 from your own pocket for the difference.
Ouch! Ask the seller to reduce the price by $250,000. Good luck there.
Or, finally, you can make the deal contingent upon the property apprais-
ing for no less than the purchase price. If the lender’s appraisal comes
up short, this contingency allows you to get out of the deal.
Here are a few tips on managing and using your contingencies like a pro:
 Keeping track of contingency periods and expiration dates can be trying,
so try posting a contingency log on your office wall. That way, all the
dates are visible and trackable with a blink of an eye. This is especially
helpful if you, like your humble authors, make several offers at once on
many different properties. Also consider setting up reminders for contin-
gency and expiration dates on your computer’s desktop scheduler.
 If you find yourself running out of due diligence time in one of the con-
tingencies, it’s okay to ask the seller in writing for a time extension.
Usually, the seller will grant you more time if you can show good intent
toward removing the contingency. However, don’t wait for the last day of
due diligence to ask for a time extension on a contingency. Doing so
leaves you in a weak and vulnerable negotiating position.
 Adding too many contingencies to your contract weakens your offer in
the eyes of the seller. It makes you look like you want to get out before
you even get in.
 A neat (and sneaky!) way to lengthen your due diligence time period for
a contingency is to change the word “calendar days” to “business days.”
For example, a contingency clause may state that you have 30 calendar
days to perform your duties. But if you change the wording to 30 busi-
ness days, you have just bought yourself 10 extra days of due diligence
(because business days don’t include Saturdays and Sundays).
113Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework
You Found Problems, What Now?
Okay, so you’ve done your due diligence and you have all the reports in front
of you. Take a deep breath because this is the part where surprises always
seem to come up. The first question to ask yourself is this: “If I already owned
the property would this be a big problem or a minor annoyance?” The biggest
challenge all of us face is that we’re too close to the deal. We can’t keep our-
selves from thinking about the thousands or millions of dollars we’re going to
make on the property we haven’t even bought yet.
To figure out how to proceed, as best as you can, (and it isn’t going to be easy
to do), answer this question: “If I first saw this deal today, and knowing every-
thing that I know at this point, how much would the property be worth to me?”
You basically have two options here (which if you read carefully are actually
three):
 You may have such a great deal that the problems you’ve uncovered
really don’t matter. The property is still worth buying even if you can’t
or don’t want to renegotiate further with the seller. (We tend to renegoti-
ate anyway. But then again we think it’s fun!)
 If the problems are serious enough that your current price and terms
with the seller no longer make sense, you can walk away from the deal
or renegotiate.
If you’re already going to walk away from a deal, why not take the extra step
of renegotiating with the seller — just for the fun of it. The worst case is that
you end up losing the deal (which you’ve already decided to walk away from
anyway).
After reviewing the reports, you probably have a good idea of what the issues
are with the property. So make a list of every issue that you need to address.
Rate those items on a scale from 1 to 10. Assume that 10 is a property issue
that definitely scares the living daylights out of you and affects the value of the
property, that 5 is an issue that can be taken care of at a later date with mini-
mal cost, and that 1 is an issue that you can say “oh well” to. After rating the
issues, present your prioritized findings to the seller and start renegotiating.
Renegotiating with the seller
At this point, you’ve probably had the property under contract for 60 days or
longer. During that time the seller has likely been thinking and hoping (even
though he knows you can still get out of the deal) that the deal goes through.
This situation tends to work in your favor as the buyer, especially if you
114 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
remember that there are plenty more deals out there for you if this one doesn’t
work out. And hopefully the seller is thinking about the chunk of money that
he’s going to get or the next commercial investment property that he wants
to buy.
Here’s a quick script showing the best way to explain to the seller that you
need a lower price:
Mr. Seller, any other buyer who comes in and finds out about this property
problem [insert your issue here] is going to want to reduce the price at least
as much as I’m asking for, and possibly more. Rather than taking all that
time to find another buyer who’s just going to make the same reasonable
request that I am, why don’t we save everyone time and money by agreeing
to the same price that you’d end up with anyway?
Because you have contingency clauses in the purchase contract that allow
you to walk away from a deal that doesn’t make sense, you shouldn’t feel
obligated to follow through with a deal unless it’s a big win for you. What this
really means is that the time period after you’ve found problems is when
the real negotiating begins. In fact, some of our mentoring students don’t
consider a property a “real deal” until they have renegotiated after the due
diligence process is completed.
Making the final decision:
Stay in or run away?
When you’re making the final decision as to whether you want to buy a prop-
erty or not, you want to talk with your mentor or other trusted investor
friend. If the deal just doesn’t make sense, make one last effort to renegotiate
the deal. If that doesn’t work, be willing to walk away. We have a saying that
keeps us positive and always wanting more: “Every deal that I walk away
from is just practice for the next deal.”
Make sure that you leave the door open when you walk away. Let the seller
know that the deal isn’t a fit right now but that the future could bring a differ-
ent situation. Some of our best deals have come from working with sellers
who were mad at the previous buyers for not closing on the deal.
Sometime sellers actually make poor business decisions by not selling to you.
Yes, that’s right! So, the next time a deal doesn’t work out and you walk away,
wait 20 to 30 days and then go back to the seller to see if the deal is still
around. He or she may be more motivated to negotiate now, especially if no
other investor has made an offer since yours. In a few of our deals, we actu-
ally were able to get better deals than the original one by following up in
this way.
115Chapter 6: Due Diligence: Doing Your Homework
Setting the sails for the closing date
As you work through all of your due diligence tasks, it’s vitally important that
you keep an eye on the day that your contract says you’re supposed to close.
If you know that you won’t be able to complete all of your due diligence tasks
or you have encountered problems and need more time to resolve them, you
have a few choices to make. You have the following three options:
 You can back out of the deal, especially if the problems you encountered
make this deal a bad one.
 You can get an extension of time to complete your due diligence.
 You can strive to complete your due diligence and set the sails for the
closing date.
The goal here is to get to a point in giving this deal the green light or the red
light. If you’re giving the green light, assume the following:
 The physical inspection due diligence is complete.
 The financial inspection due diligence is complete.
 The legal inspection due diligence is complete.
 You have satisfied every contingency clause in the contract.
 You have completed your renegotiating with the seller and everything
agreed on is in writing.
116 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Chapter 7
Closing Your Deal
In This Chapter
 Understanding the basics of commercial closing
 Minding the details before signing the paperwork
 Knowing what to expect on closing day
 Taking ownership of your property
This is the day you’ve been waiting for: The day when you finally get to
close your deal! Whether this deal is your first or your tenth, every clos-
ing day is special. All those hours spent negotiating, late evenings spent
crunching the numbers, long days spent walking through and assessing the
property, sleepless nights spent waiting for loan approval, not to mention all
that time spent dealing with your partners and handling investors — all of it
is scheduled to come to an end on closing day. This day should be one of cel-
ebration and accomplishment. Ultimately, closing your deal is the beginning
of a new investment in a great property, in your bright future, and in your
hardworking team.
In this chapter, we tell you where getting to the closing table actually begins,
we help you decide when to pull the trigger, and we help you identify when a
deal is a real deal. We also help you dodge those inevitable delays in closing.
Finally, we explain what’s involved in taking legal ownership and what crucial
steps you need to take immediately after closing.
Residential closing versus commercial closing
Q: What’s the difference between closing on a
single-family residence and closing on an
80,000-square-foot shopping center?
A: Very little. If you’ve closed on a house, you’re
familiar with the nuts and bolts of closing
your first commercial property. The basics of a
residential closing — such as opening an
escrow account, handling deposits, dealing
with closing costs, obtaining title insurance,
transferring titles, and moving buyer and seller
monies — also take place with the closing of
a commercial property.
The Anatomy of a Close
In order to really understand how a deal gets closed and how you get the
keys or a big check at the end, it helps to look at what a commercial deal
entails — from the signing of the contract to the closing day. The following
big-picture view helps you get a handle on what takes place with the person
making the offer, the escrow/title company, the lender, and the attorney:
1. The buyer makes an offer to purchase and, if the seller likes the offer,
the seller accepts and signs it.
Congratulations, you’re officially under contract!
2. The buyer opens escrow with an escrow/title company or attorney
and sends in earnest money as a deposit to the escrow holder.
3. The buyer starts the financing process with his lender and sends nec-
essary documents to the lender to qualify both the property and
himself (and/or his partners).
4. The buyer does his due diligence (such as reviewing the property’s
financial statements and other property-related information as set
forth in the contract) and does a physical inspection of the property.
5. The buyer examines the title and removes contract contingencies.
6. The buyer and seller satisfy any remaining obligations as set forth in
the contract.
7. The buyer finalizes the loan with the lender by getting an official
letter of commitment from the lender.
8. The buyer reviews the closing statement and finalizes any final clos-
ing instructions with the escrow company.
9. On closing day, the buyer signs the closing paperwork with the
escrow company and makes a down payment.
10. The deed is recorded, monies are disbursed, and the buyer gets the
keys.
Congratulations, your deal is closed!
Closing 101: The Basics
of Closing a Deal
If you’re brand new to buying and selling real estate, you probably have all
kinds of questions regarding the critical stage of closing a deal. Not to worry:
Where you have questions, we have answers. Read on.
118 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
What is an escrow and who
is an escrow officer?
An escrow is a neutral, impartial third party that serves others (the buyer, the
seller, the lender, the real estate agents, and the attorneys) in a property
transfer. An escrow officer is the central point person throughout the closing
process. Her duties include all the following:
 Clearing outstanding liens held against the property
 Disbursing monies to all parties
 Handling the in earnest deposit, the down payment, the loan documents,
and the closing fees associated with the property transfer
 Minimizing the chance of fraud when the money and the property are
transferred
 Obtaining payoff amounts of loans associated with the property
 Obtaining title insurance
 Ordering the title search and examination for the title report
 Preparing and issuing the final closing statements
 Recording the deed after all deal and legal obligations have been satisfied
 Returning signed loan documents to the lender
The escrow officer is also sometimes referred to as the escrow holder, the title
officer, the closing agent, the closer, or the settlement agent. In the eastern half
of the United States, attorneys are commonly used to close deals and they
often act as the escrow company.
What is title insurance?
After you have legal title of the property, you’re considered the owner. But
what happens if the title came to you with a lien against it? What if the liens
against the property total thousands of dollars? That’s where title insurance
comes into play.
Title insurance insures you against such things as liens, undiscovered liens,
improper recording of deeds, and other things that could negatively affect
the title. The protection period of the title insurance extends backward,
which means that it insures you against losses from the past ownerships of
the property. And the insurance is in effect as long as you own the property.
119Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal
If the person you’re buying the property from already has title insurance, you
can’t have the current owner transfer his title insurance to you, even if it’s
brand new. You have to buy new title insurance yourself. Who pays for the
cost of title insurance, the buyer or seller, depends on what’s customary for
that city.
Some lenders give you a choice of whether to buy title insurance. We recom-
mend that you buy title insurance even if you’re sure there’s nothing wrong
with the title. Some title problems can be so bad that they can cause the title
to be deemed “unmarketable.” This kind of situation is exactly what title
insurance protects you against. Some people think that if they paid cash for
the property, they don’t need title insurance. Just because you have a grant
deed with your name on it doesn’t mean that you have clear title.
Do I need an attorney for my closing?
All of our East Coast closings were completed through a real estate attorney.
On the other hand, all of our West Coast closings were done by escrow/title
companies. So whether you need an attorney for your closing depends on
where your property is located. Look and see what’s customary in your state
or city by asking an experienced local real estate agent.
Attorneys commonly handle commercial real estate closings. And having the
help of an attorney is advantageous, because so many things can go wrong
during a closing. With all the complex language that’s used in closing paper-
work, an attorney can help you wade through it all.
When you hire an attorney to step into the shoes of an escrow company, the
attorney will do the traditional escrow company duties, plus they’ll also
 Coordinate the closing date and help keep the buyer and seller sides and
the lender on track
 Help review all documents for accuracy
 Personally attend the closing
 Write up any needed contract amendments
Don’t hire your family attorney to close your commercial deal; instead, hire
a real estate attorney. Real estate attorneys, unlike general attorneys, are
trained to understand zoning, real estate laws, bylaws, environmental restric-
tions, tax issues, and entity issues, among many other small legal — but
important — details that can come back and bite you on the rear end.
120 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Do closing costs differ in
commercial real estate?
Folks always want to know whether closing costs are an issue in commercial
real estate (just as they are in residential real estate). The quick answer is
yes. And there are two main reasons for this:
 Typically, commercial real estate deals are bigger than residential
single-family deals. The fees that are calculated based on the size of
the deal, such as title insurance, are larger in scale.
 Commercial closing involves a few more third-party costs that are
larger. For example, a new survey generated on a single-family property
could cost a few hundred dollars and is only necessary if a lender requires
it. For a large apartment complex, however, the survey could cost tens
of thousands of dollars, and commercial lenders nearly always require a
survey. Similarly, an appraisal report for a single-family home will cost
around $500 and take one week to deliver, but for a shopping center, it
may easily cost $5,000 and typically take three to four weeks to deliver.
As a general rule, you can expect commercial closing costs to be about 3 per-
cent of the purchase price. This figure is just a quick estimate, though. If you
want a more specific figure, call an escrow company and ask for the typical
closing costs incurred. Note: You’ll have to give the escrow company a pur-
chase price, or at least an estimation of a purchase price, in order to receive
an estimate.
Closing costs are always negotiable and never etched in stone. Some closing
costs may be customary for the city you’re in, but they’re still negotiable.
Closing costs are usually spelled out in the purchase contract; if not, they
should be. Negotiate with the seller by having him pick up some or most of
the costs, or have the seller credit you a certain dollar amount at the time of
closing for closing costs. The only nonnegotiable closing costs pertain to the
loan (such as transfer taxes and recording fees).
Is it better to close at the end
or beginning of the month?
If we had to name one real estate question that starts bar fights, this is it! We
don’t want to start a fight, so we make the case for both and let you decide
which one is most beneficial for your unique situation.
For the most part, the choice comes down to reducing your out-of-pocket
costs at closing by paying less in prepaid interest on your mortgage. Or you
can get credited for almost a full month’s rent at closing. Your choice.
121Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal
Here’s an example to guide you: If you close on June 2, for example, you prepay
28 days of interest to cover June’s interest. In this case, you have to bring
more cash to the closing than if you had closed three days earlier, on May 31.
And your first mortgage payment would be due August 1. Your August 1 pay-
ment includes the interest payment for July. On the other hand, you would
also receive 28 days of rent (prorated and credited to you at closing), plus all
of July’s rent without having to make a mortgage payment in July.
If you close on June 29 instead, you prepay one day of interest to cover the
last day in June. Your first mortgage payment would be due August 1. Your
August 1 payment includes the interest payment for July. The main benefit is
that you minimized out-of-pocket costs at closing. Of course, this helps
investors who are coming close to running out of cash after closing. You
would also receive July’s rental income without having to make a mortgage
payment in July.
Being able to collect one month’s rent and not having to pay the month’s
mortgage is a big benefit to either scenario. You’ll be able to start off with a
sizable savings account or have the capital to do immediate improvements,
if needed.
How long does it take to
close a commercial deal?
We knew you were going to ask how long a closing takes. Patience is a virtue,
my friend! Here’s our answer: Commercial closings can take two to three
times longer than residential closings. And the simple reason is this: You’re
buying not only a piece of real estate but, in the lender’s eyes, a business
as well. The lender is lending you millions of dollars to operate an income-
generating entity. Therefore, the amount of time and effort everyone spends
to confirm the integrity of the “business” takes an average of two months,
maybe longer on more complicated deals.
Chapter 6 is dedicated to the subject of due diligence and gives you the scope
of work that’s required in a commercial closing. As you’ll see, it takes time to
get your arm around the whole deal. So give yourself a minimum of 45 to 60
days to close your deal.
The Big Picture Show: Questions to Ask
Yourself Before You Pull the Trigger
Before you start ordering everyone around to finalize their duties and obliga-
tions for closing, you need to do a couple of things. Start by thinking about
122 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
the big picture. Why are you purchasing this property? How will you make a
profit? Is your plan doable? Do others agree with your plan? Most likely, you
had big plans and dreams for this deal when it first went under contract — is
that dream still alive this late in the game? Odds are, you found out some
things — some good and some bad. Are you ready and willing to pull the trig-
ger? The following sections can help you decide.
What are my exit strategies?
An exit strategy is your means of earning a profit on your property. You can
have an exit strategy to sell, or you can have an exit strategy to refinance. Or
you may just want to hold the property for a monthly income. Even though
they’re all different, all exit strategies get your profit out of the property.
Know your exit strategies inside and out, but hold them loosely. Don’t force
one just to make yourself right.
Have an exit strategy designed before you make an offer on a property. And
before you close, come up with multiple exit strategies. Why? Because
market conditions may change, loan parameters may be altered at the last
minute, problems with the property’s title may appear at the 11th hour, or
your personal life may shift in some way. If you’re stuck on only one exit
strategy and you aren’t flexible, any change in the deal’s circumstances can
kill the deal, even though it may still be a good opportunity.
Are my investment goals being met?
After spending, say, three months to get your newest deal headed toward a
closing, do you stand a chance of meeting your investment goals? After
months of due diligence and weeding out the good, the bad, and the ugly,
does this deal still make you tons of money? Those are the million dollar
questions, aren’t they?
Because these questions are obviously worth a lot, don’t take them lightly.
Here are four safety checkpoints to consider:
 What’s your time frame? From what you know now about this deal, is
the time frame for your exit strategy still valid? Will you be able to exe-
cute your exit strategy quicker or will you have to delay it? If you delay
it, how much longer will it be?
 Is your profit what you expected? Now that you’ve studied this deal
inside and out, is the profit that you projected still there? Do you see an
even greater potential? Do you see any hurdles on the road to cashing in?
 Does your loan work? A big part of understanding the big picture is
knowing exactly what type of loan you’re getting. You should know your
123Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal
monthly payment, interest rate, loan term in years, prepay penalty, and
amortization period at this point.
 Did your tax guy or gal approve? Have you run your exit strategy sce-
narios by your tax advisor for any possible tax issues? Can she validate
your strategies and give you a thumbs up?
If you can nod your head “yes” confidently to these four safety checkpoints,
then what are you waiting for? Pull that trigger!
Sweating the Details before
Signing on the Dotted Line
As the closing nears, you want to adopt a certain type of attitude — an atti-
tude that may save you thousands of dollars in mistakes and miscalculations.
So what’s the attitude we’re referring to? Being pesky! Question every figure
on every document. Double-check any math. Don’t assume anything. Take
nothing for granted. Sweat the details. Being a pest will save you not only
money, but precious time and headaches as well.
The title work
A title examiner will research the property’s chain of title. The chain of title is
the history of ownership going all the way back to the original owner. It shows
an exact description of the property, dates of purchases, loans put on the
property, liens, and encumbrances. The title examiner’s primary goal is to
ensure that the seller has clear title to the property before selling it. The
examiner does the following:
 Looks for defects in the title, such as:
• Easements
• Delinquent taxes
• Judgment liens
• Mechanics liens
• Pending lawsuits
• Restrictions
• Tax liens
 Confirms the current owner and the property description
 Determines how the title company will issue title insurance
124 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Defects make the title “unmarketable” and stop the seller from legally selling
the property. So defects must be cleared from the title before the seller can
sell the property. However, in some instances, the buyer may agree to move
forward with exceptions to the title.
Have your real estate attorney review the title work; if it’s found to be clouded
in any way, work to get it cleared within the time constraints on the purchase
contract.
A good commercial purchase contract will have a title contingency clause in
it. This means that the title has to be delivered “clean” within a certain number
of days, or the contract is null and void. Make sure your contract has this
contingency.
The closing instructions
and closing statement
Closing instructions are just that: written instructions for the escrow officer,
explaining how the transaction will take place. The closing instructions spec-
ify who pays for what costs, who gets what disbursement (and when), and
when the recording takes place. The instructions should also list all the con-
ditions to be met prior to the closing (such as inspection report findings and
work to be completed), items to be credited or prorated (such as rents, taxes,
insurance, or repair credits), and the closing costs that the seller and buyer
will be paying.
The closing statement, which is also known as a settlement statement, is legally
referred to as a HUD-1 settlement statement. If you’ve purchased any kind of
real estate before, you’ve seen a closing statement. It’s the official form used
to show all fees, charges, and commissions. It lists the final tally of what the
buyer and seller are paying for, including the following:
 Appraisal fees
 Escrow fees
 Loan origination fees
 Loan payoff amounts
 Notary fees
 Premiums for hazard insurance and title insurance
 Prepaid interest
 Recording fees
 The principal of the new loan
125Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal
 Transfer fees
 Various taxes
We fill you in on the closing statement in greater detail in the later section
“What’s on a closing statement?”
Ask to see and review the closing statement at least 48 hours before the clos-
ing. There is a 50/50 chance that the closing statement includes a mistake.
The mistake could be a charge or credit not in your favor, something missed
from the closing instructions, or just a plain old typo. That’s why you want to
see it early, rather than an hour before closing: You then have time to request
that the mistake be fixed. And the more people who review the closing state-
ment, the more mistakes you’ll find. So have your attorney, your real estate
agent, and your escrow officer study it. And don’t forget to study it yourself.
The lender
The lender often is the bottleneck in getting to the closing table. After all, the
lender has a lot of paperwork to go over and confirm. So it’s your job to call
the lender every day (we’re not kidding!) a week before closing to keep him
on track. You can also ask the lender if there’s anything you can do or your
attorney can do to help him stay on schedule.
Part of the lending process involves an underwriter who scrutinizes the prop-
erty, the borrower, and the loan. Before the underwriter can give the thumbs
up, he’ll ask at least a thousand questions (a slight exaggeration) beyond the
information that you provided weeks ago. When the underwriter has a good
understanding of everything, he issues “conditions under which a loan can
be made” on the property. The conditions to be satisfied may be further cause
for delay. Some typical conditions to close may be having certain repairs com-
pleted on the property or for the property to be at least 85 percent occupied
for at least three months. Make sure your lender jumps on meeting the condi-
tions and that you make every effort to get them completed as well.
Closing Day: What to Expect
The first thing to expect on closing day is for the sun to rise and for it to be a
beautiful day! If you’ve prepared properly, the day of closing should be another
wonderful day in the life of a commercial real estate investor (even if it hap-
pens to be raining).
If you follow the safety checkpoints in this section, you’ll be in pretty good
shape on closing day. But as luck always has it, at least one or two things are
bound to fall through the cracks. If you count on these minor glitches to
happen, you won’t be stressed when they do.
126 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
On closing day, expect to sign a stack of documents, and expect small mis-
takes and miscalculations to take place. Expect that some of the documents
will need to be reprinted. And expect to spend at least an hour signing and
reverifying all the paperwork.
What’s on a closing statement?
The document at the center of the transaction of closing is the final closing
statement, which is also called the HUD-1 settlement statement. The closing
statement is important, so in this section we explain what’s on it.
The closing statement for commercial real estate is the same form that’s used
in closing residential single-family home transactions. It lays out the charges
in getting the transaction closed (see the earlier section “The closing instruc-
tions and closing statement” for a list of charges you might see on a closing
statement). The amounts shown on the HUD-1 statement are final when
agreed on and signed by the buyer and seller.
Sections A through I: General Information
Sections A through I show basic information, such as the loan type, the bor-
rower information, the lender information, the location of the property, the
closing office information, and the close date.
Section J: Summary of Borrower’s Transaction
Section J shows the borrower’s specific settlement charges. Here’s how the
section is broken up:
 Line 100: Gross Amount Due from Borrower: Line 120 totals the cumu-
lative total of the purchase price plus total closing fees.
 Line 200: Amounts Paid By or on Behalf of Borrower: Line 220 totals
the amount needed to satisfy the transaction, such as the new loan, the
earnest deposit, the down payment, taxes, and any amounts the seller
owes the buyer (such as for repairs and so on).
 Line 300: Cash at Settlement from/to Borrower: Line 303 totals the
amount of cash the buyer needs to bring to the closing.
Section K: Summary of Seller’s Transaction
This section shows the total amount due to the seller. Here’s what the one
line number in this section looks like:
Line 400: Gross Amount Due to Seller: Line 420 totals the purchase price
plus any adjustments for prepaid taxes or unpaid taxes.
127Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal
Section L: Settlement Charges
Section L basically breaks down all the fees and amounts, referred to as “set-
tlement charges,” that the buyer and seller are responsible for. Here’s how the
section is broken up:
 Line 700: Total Sales/Broker’s Commission Based on Price: The com-
mission charged by the real estate broker for services
 Line 800: Items Payable in Connection with Loan: The loan origination
fee, any discount points paid to reduce the mortgage rate, the appraisal
fee, the credit report fee, and the application fee for mortgage insurance
 Line 900: Items Required by Lender to Be Paid in Advance: The inter-
est on the loan for the period before the first monthly payment, and the
initial mortgage insurance and hazard insurance premiums for 12 months
 Line 1000: Reserves Deposited with Lender: Escrow items that the
lender holds to cover future expenses, such as property taxes and
annual assessments
 Line 1100: Title Charges: Costs of changing ownership of the property,
such as the settlement or closing fee, title examination fee, and
attorney’s fee
 Line 1200: Government Recording and Transfer Charges: City, county,
and state taxes or stamps needed to transfer ownership
 Line 1300: Additional Settlement Charges: Surveys and inspections (for
pests and lead-based paint, for example)
 Line 1400: Total Settlement Charges: Sum total of all the previously
listed fees
The amount listed in the buyer’s (or borrower’s) column should be identical
to the amount listed as “settlement charges to borrower” (line 103), while the
amount in the seller’s column should be the same as the “settlement charges
to seller” (line 502).
What exactly will I be signing?
The exact documents you have to sign depend on the state in which you’re
purchasing the property and the type of loan that you’re getting. But here’s a
list of typical documents you can expect to sign:
 HUD-1 settlement statement: This is the document we explain in detail
in the preceding section. It’s basically your final tally on what’s transfer-
ring dollarwise between the buyer and the seller and what each side is
responsible for in fees, charges, and taxes.
 Mortgage and deed of trust: You’ll be signing the originals. Many other
loan documents are included in this package as well.
128 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
 Escrow instruction from lender: This form states that you acknowledge
meeting the conditions for the loan before the deed of trust can be
recorded. These instructions also explain to the escrow officer the
sequence and timing of the recording.
 Truth-in-lending disclosure statement: This is a federal disclosure state-
ment that gives the buyer information about the costs of the credit so
that the buyer may compare those costs with those of other loan pro-
grams or lenders.
 Various affidavits: The lender may have the seller sign an affidavit stat-
ing that she has completed certain property repairs and improvements
prior to closing.
 Fire insurance coverage: The lender may require the buyer to sign an
acknowledgment form stating that she’ll maintain fire insurance on the
property and that, if she doesn’t, the lender will enforce its own insur-
ance coverage and bill the buyer for it.
 Bill of sale: This is a receipt for the personal property items that the
seller is leaving behind for the buyer to take possession of.
 Grant deed: Only the seller’s signature is needed here.
What if you can’t be at the signing on closing day? No problem at all. Life hap-
pens, right? All you have to do is get a power of attorney signed for the
person who can step into your place. That person can be your attorney, a
family member, a partner, or someone else you trust. A power of attorney is
simple to get from an attorney, or you can ask the escrow officer to set one
up for the signee.
Don’t be worried if a few documents have to be redrawn while you’re signing.
Small errors can and do happen at this stage of the closing. It will only take a
few minutes to recompute and reprint.
What should I do before signing?
Whether you’re the buyer or the seller, you can ask yourself some key ques-
tions before the signing, just to make sure that you haven’t overlooked any-
thing critical. Before you sign your name on all those documents, be sure to
run through the checklist in the following sections — the first section is for
buyers, and the second is for sellers.
Buyer safety checkpoints before signing
As you walk into the closer’s office, ask questions, get answers, and confirm
for yourself the following:
129Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal
 Is the loan amount correct? Are the terms equal to what the lender
promised in writing? Check the interest rate, the amortization period,
the loan term, the monthly payment amount, the prepay penalty
structure, and the due date.
 Did the lender set up an impound account for taxes and insurance pay-
ments, if necessary? Or are you responsible for paying them directly?
 Did the lender set up a maintenance reserves account for the property?
 Were there any additional credits assigned to you, such as credit repairs
or closing costs credits?
 If the seller has promised to perform any physical repairs on the prop-
erty, are those completed?
 Are the rent prorations and tenant security deposit credit amounts
correct?
 Did you agree to have any personal property be assigned to you? Is
there a bill of sale?
 Are the purchase price, names, and dates on the deed correct?
 Are the fee amounts the same that you agreed to?
 Is the title clear? Have all title defects been cured? Ask for proof.
 Are your down payment and closing costs ready to be wire transferred
to the escrow company? Do you have the bank wiring information? Give
yourself a full 24 hours or more for the wire to take place from sender to
receiver.
If you’re using a 1031 tax-deferred exchange (see Chapter 16) and you
plan to close on the last day allowed (the 180th day), watch out for
delayed wire transfers. Wire transfers have been known to hang up clos-
ings for two to three days. If you go beyond the 180th day on your 1031
exchange, you’re out of luck and haven’t met the strict exchange rules,
and that means you’ll pay capital gains taxes. Ouch! Plan ahead.
 At the bottom of the settlement statement is an amount that you have to
bring to the table to close the deal — do you agree with this amount?
 Have you decided how you’re going to hold title as a form of ownership?
Limited liability company (LLC)? Limited partnership (LP)? If so, bring
this to the attention of the escrow officer as soon as possible for
processing.
Seller safety checkpoints before signing
As you walk into the closer’s office, ask questions, get answers, and confirm
for yourself the following:
 Is the purchase price correct?
 If you’re giving credits, are the amounts what you agreed on?
130 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
 Are the loan payoff amounts correct?
 If you’re assigning any personal property to the buyer, is the bill of sale
filled out correctly?
 Are the security deposits, credit amounts, and rent prorations correct?
 At the bottom of the settlement statement is the amount of profit —
does it match your expectations? If not, why?
When am I officially closed?
After the closing escrow officer has the signed loan documents, after the
buyer has paid all monies due, after the buyer and seller have signed off on
the final escrow closing instructions, and after choosing a specific date to
record the deeds, then a closing may happen — or, escrow may close (as it’s
said in the industry).
Next, the escrow officer will get a check from the buyer’s lender to pay off the
seller’s loan. From there, the escrow officer will send the lender the closing
loan documents. When the lender receives and approves of the completeness
of the loan documents, the lender will give the go-ahead to release the buyer’s
payment to pay off the seller’s loan and give the okay for the deed to be
recorded. Ownership is hereby transferred to you! You’re now officially closed!
To top off the deal, we like to send the closing escrow officer a bouquet of
flowers or a small gift, whichever is appropriate. And we send thank-you
cards to the lender’s staff, our attorney, and anyone else who has played a
part in making the closing happen. These small gestures display class and
appreciation on your part and acknowledge their hard work and dedication.
Taking Legal Ownership
Well before the closing, you’re going to have to make a decision on how to
hold title of your property. In other words, what form of ownership are you
going to use? The decision you make has huge legal, tax, asset protection,
and exit-strategy consequences. Talk to your attorney, as well as your tax
advisor, before making such a decision.
When we first started investing, we had both of our advisors talk with each
other to provide us with the soundest advice because there was so much to
consider the first time. If we held title in our personal names, we’d be expos-
ing ourselves to potential liability and privacy concerns. If we held title as a
corporation, we could face double taxation. How would we take title if we had
two investment partners?
131Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal
So what do you do? Look at holding title the same way you would look at
buying a new car:
 You buy a car that fits your lifestyle. So, choose a form of ownership that
fits the goals and nature of the investment.
 You buy a car that makes sense financially. So, choose a form of owner-
ship that your tax advisor says gives you the best tax advantages.
 You buy a car based on your research in terms of safety and costs to
maintain. So, choose a form of ownership that provides you the greatest
privacy and most efficient asset protection.
Legal forms of ownership, called entities, are typically held in the following
entity types:
 Sole proprietorship
 Corporation
 Limited liability company (LLC)
 Partnerships (such as limited partnership or general partnership)
 Trust
 Individual retirement account (IRA)
We cover this topic in much more detail in Chapter 12.
You’re the Boss Now: What Next?
Okay, you own the property now, you have a handful of keys, and you’ve
actually pinched yourself to make sure you aren’t dreaming. You’re actually
the owner! So what do you do next?
Start by taking a deep breath, because this is when the real work begins. You’re
going to have to take steps to ensure a smooth takeover of the property.
Getting off to a fast and well-organized start makes all the difference in the
world in the first few months of ownership.
We divide this process into four stages. In Stage 1, you get basic property infor-
mation from the previous owner and previous/current property management
company. Stage 2 entails getting the takeover teams prepared for landing.
Stage 3 involves securing the property on the takeover date. And Stage 4 is
the debriefing stage, where you report on the findings from Stage 3.
132 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Stage 1: Assess the situation
When in this stage, you’re on an information and fact-gathering mission. Your
goal is to get any and all relevant property information that you can from the
previous owner, manager, and/or property management company. After
you’ve gathered all this information, you’re going to set up all the various
business systems for the property. Here are some guidelines to follow:
 Before takeover, contact the previous owner/manager to get:
• Contact information regarding the onsite manager
• The number of units or spaces
• A detailed rent roll that includes rent/lease amounts and square
footage of the units or space
 Get the name of the new owner and a signed management agreement
with the agreed-on compensation.
 List the current employees on the payroll with duties, salaries, part-time/
full-time status, and tenure.
 Obtain copies of the year-end and current month’s income and expense
statement.
 Get a copy of the operating budget, if there is one.
 Find out whether the bank account is set up.
 Determine whether there are any legal actions pending against the
property.
 Make sure you and your new management agree on the type of financial
reporting that’s expected.
 Get copies of the property’s service contracts, list of vendors, and exist-
ing warranties.
 Get insurance information. Is it paid from impounds or will it be paid
directly when due?
 Get property tax information. Is it paid from impounds or will it be paid
directly when due?
Stage 2: Assemble the team
At this stage of the game, you have to decide who’s on your team. Here’s
what to do:
133Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal
 “Shop the property” by visiting it with a “secret shopper.” What you’re
doing here is sending in one person to act as if they’re interested in rent-
ing. That person will then report to management on these things:
• How they were greeted?
• Was the sales pitch good or weak?
• Was the property being shown in impeccable condition?
• How was the visit tracked?
 Assemble the takeover team and assign duties to the onsite manager, the
leasing agent, the assistant manager, and the maintenance staff.
Stage 3: Secure the site
This stage is similar to sending in the Navy Seal team to secure the beach for
the ensuing takeover. Your management team will be in place implementing
their staff and operations on the property. Here are some specific steps you
need to take:
 Secure the cash at the property, secure the office, change the locks on
property, and reset passwords of any type.
 Secure all master keys from any existing personnel.
 Have the senior-level manager introduce all new staff to the existing staff
and conduct individual meetings with all staff to discuss duties, salaries,
and so on.
 Set up management and maintenance staff work schedules.
 Start advertising for leasing and hiring, if necessary.
 Input rent roll and tenant profiles in your computer.
 Prepare the delinquent tenant rents report.
 Set up the operating budget.
 Do a complete personal property inventory.
 Change over the utilities — electric, water, trash, gas, phone, cable — to
the new ownership.
Stage 4: Use the info that you discovered
After the storm has calmed, at this stage you’re in a position to debrief and
set goals moving forward. Make sure that you take care of these duties:
134 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
 Have the senior-level manager prepare a status report of the takeover of
the project by the new ownership.
 List any major work needed on the property — whether those improve-
ments are regarding physical property or personnel.
135Chapter 7: Closing Your Deal
136 Part II: Getting Started Making Deals
Part III
Funding Your
Deals: Financing
and Lending
In this part . . .
In Chapter 8 of this part, you find out how to get
approved for conventional financing. Or, if you like the
idea of getting creative and buying commercial real estate
without using any of your own cash or credit, check out
Chapter 9, which presents some ideas for more creative
financing. We close this part by helping you discover the
secrets of raising private capital and putting together
profitable partnerships.
Chapter 8
Conventional Financing Options
In This Chapter
 Seeing what the commercial lending process looks like
 Understanding how commercial lending and residential lending differ
 Examining what criteria lenders use to evaluate property
 Gaining your lender’s approval
 Selecting a loan that fits your situation
Okay, so here’s a riddle for you: Out of all the tasks when buying commer-
cial property, which takes the longest? And what requires you to file
enough paper documents to kill a forest full of trees? Give up? Here’s the
answer: getting a loan for your deal!
Well, it isn’t really that bad, but sometimes it can sure feel like it. Getting your
property financed involves jumping through quite a few hoops. For example,
you have to figure out how much income the property brings in, what the
quality is of the people or companies that make up the income, how well the
property supports the mortgage, what condition the property is in, whether
the property appraises for the price that you’re buying it for, and, how finan-
cially strong the buyer or buyers are.
Deciding on the type of financing you need or want depends on many factors
as well. One of the most important deciding factors is your exit strategy.
Simply put, your exit strategy is why you’re buying the property in the first
place. For example, if you plan to buy and keep a retail center for a long time,
you might consider a long-term permanent loan with a fixed interest rate. Or
if you want to buy an apartment building for a short period of time, you may
want to consider a loan that has a low upfront cost and low interest rate.
We show you what lenders like and don’t like in a deal, what makes interest
rates tick, and last, what the lending process looks like — from A to Z. At this
rate, you may know more than Mr. Lender wants you to know! Read on my
friends.
The Commercial Lending
Process in a Nutshell
There’s a lot to wade through in the world of commercial lending, but devel-
oping an understanding of the processes and jargon definitely pays off as you
begin making decisions in what could possibly be your biggest financial
investment ever.
Personally, we like to look at the whole lending process as we would look at
making online travel reservations. For example, you start off by researching
what’s out there. Then you dig deeper and narrow your wants and needs.
From there, you start making decisions and booking hotels and flights. And at
last, it’s time to reap the rewards of your efforts. There’s a process to every-
thing we humans do — even when it comes to lending.
The more you understand and go through a process, the easier it becomes
because the steps start to become much more predictable. This goes for the
lending process, too. So, in this section, we give you the information that you
need put the pieces of the lender puzzle together. The first puzzle piece is an
inside look at what the lender goes through in getting you to the closing
table, and the second is the power of momentum.
Seeing the process through
your lender’s eyes
There’s one question that I (coauthor Peter Harris) always had early on in my
career: How does the lending process work? What does it look like from A to
Z? After I understood the process, I was in a much better position to under-
stand what goes on at every step of the way. For instance, being familiar with
the process helped me help my lender get to the closing table quicker, and
sometimes it helped alleviate some of the frustrations I had with my lender
or with the whole process in general. I’m sure it’ll help you as well.
The following is an overview on what your typical lender goes through to get
you to the closing table. As you read through these steps, make two assump-
tions: that you’re under contract to purchase the property and that your due
diligence period has started:
 Preapproval begins: At this stage, you send your lender three years of
income and expense property statements, a current rent roll, and exte-
rior and interior pictures of the property. Do this as quickly as possible
so that the lender can preapprove the property before you get too deep
into it.
140 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
 Borrower investigation: The lender sends you a loan application to
qualify you financially, including your creditworthiness.
 Lender-ordered reports: After the property is preapproved and you’re
deemed creditworthy, the lender orders an appraisal report to be con-
ducted for the property. This report ensures that your purchase price
matches with the lender’s value of the property. In most cases, the bor-
rower pays for the appraisal upfront and not at closing.
The lender also orders a termite report. The termite report is performed
on the property to inspect for pest infestation. If the inspector does find
an infestation, this issue must be addressed before closing by either party.
 Miscellaneous lender duties: At this point, many things jump into action
on the lender’s side, including a review of property tax returns, proof of
funds to close, a survey review, a title review, a borrower entity review, a
proposed property management review, and so on.
 Underwriting: The entire file is reviewed by a loan assistant or document
checker (these folks review the file for accuracy, missing signatures, or
missing or incomplete documents), and then it goes into the underwrit-
ing phase. Underwriting is when the lender thoroughly examines the debt
coverage ratio and the loan-to-value ratio. During underwriting, the lender
also performs a market and operational analysis of the property. (Debt
coverage ratio, loan-to-value ratio, and simple analysis are covered in
the later section called “How Lenders Evaluate Properties.”)
 Loan approval: After underwriting is complete, the file goes up against a
loan approval committee. The committee can either approve or disap-
prove your loan. If it approves the loan, you move into the closing phase,
but if you aren’t approved, you can find out why, meet their conditions,
and reapply. Or you can try a different lender.
 The closing: The lender, the borrower, and the closing/escrow company
all work together to finalize a closing of the transaction. Final loan docu-
ments are drawn and sent to the closing/escrow company. After you
review and sign the final loan documents, the transfer of the property
takes place.
Keeping things moving without incident
The biggest deal-killer we had early on in our career was a lack of momentum.
We lost many good deals because we failed to keep the deal’s momentum going
strong. We were under the assumption that the lender and our real estate agent
would follow up on our deal and make sure that everyone was doing what he
or she should be doing. Boy, were we wrong! Following up was our responsi-
bility. And guess what? That’s your responsibility as the investor, too. Here’s
some sage advice: If you don’t keep your deal’s momentum going by staying on
top of your lender, your deal will probably fizzle out because of the lack of
follow-through, either by you or your lender.
141Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
Here are some ways of keeping your deal momentum going strong:
 Pay close attention to the financing contingency period in the pur-
chase contract. The financing contingency period is a period of days writ-
ten in the contract in which you have to get your loan approved. For
instance, if you have 45 days to get an approval for financing or to back
out, make sure that your lender is well aware of this limitation and that
by day 45 the lender can give you a letter stating that he will provide a
loan for the property. If you wait until after the contingency period, your
chances of getting a loan have dropped significantly because it probably
means the lender is having trouble with the property itself — either
financially, or because of its poor physical condition, or maybe it’s a
creditworthiness issue.
 Call your lender every day. That’s right, call every day. Be nice. Be
polite. But hold him accountable to his promises and actions. The good
lenders are busy — and they expect to be busy. So, tell him upfront that
you plan to call frequently and that you expect timely updates as well.
 Don’t stand for seller delays. Make it known to the seller that you’ll back
out of the deal if deliverable items (for example, documents for pre-
qualifying property) are delayed. Or, tell the seller that you expect to
be reimbursed with additional days of time equal to the number of days
that the seller delayed.
 Don’t procrastinate. If your lender or closing/escrow company asks you
for a document, give it to him right away. Every day you procrastinate is
one less day you have to deal with reaching your closing. And, believe
us, you need all the days you can get. Plus, if you refuse to accept seller
delays, you can’t very well be late yourself!
 Remember that no one cares more about closing your deal than you
do. All the lender has at stake is his pay. Similarly, the agent’s commis-
sion is the only thing at stake for him. However, you have a lot more at
stake if you don’t close. For instance, you risk losing your earnest deposit
money, hundreds of hours of time, and thousands of dollars spent on
inspections and reports. And, to top it all off, your investment goals
could be shattered. So keep on top of everything involved with the lend-
ing process. Remember: This is YOUR deal.
Differences between Commercial
and Residential Lending
When it comes to real estate, sales are broken up into the two following
categories:
142 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
 Residential property: From a lender’s point of view, residential property
is your personal residence, which is more than likely a single-family
home. A property that contains two to four family dwelling units —
duplexes, triplexes, or fourplexes — is also treated as residential.
 Commercial property: A commercial property, from a lender’s point of
view, is a property that contains five or more family dwelling units. Under
this category, you can have a 5-unit apartment building or a 100-unit
apartment building (or anything in between!).
These are all considered commercial as well: office buildings, strip malls,
warehouses, industrial buildings, mobile home parks, and raw land. A
property that contains a mix of any number of residential units and com-
mercial spaces is also considered commercial.
Obtaining a loan for a commercial property is similar to obtaining a loan for a
residential property. For example, with both types of loans you have to apply
for the loan and show that you have the capability of repaying the loan, you
must be creditworthy, and you must provide a down payment of some sort.
But, that’s basically where the similarities end.
There are two main differences between commercial and residential lending.
The first involves the property’s merits and the second involves the down
payment. We explain both in the following sections.
The property’s merits matter more
than the borrower’s qualifications
Commercial lenders look at property in terms of its ability to produce income
to support its expenses and mortgage. So, the lender qualifies the property in
this way first. The borrower’s qualifications are second on the totem pole.
This approach is quite the opposite when qualifying to purchase a residential
property. In residential lending, the lender looks at the borrower first, and
then the property second.
What this all means for you is that you can have horrible or no credit, but if
you have a great income-producing commercial property under contract, you
still have a superb chance of getting approved for a loan. Doesn’t this make
you smile?
The down payment requirement is higher
For a commercial property, the down payment requirement is typically 20
percent to 25 percent or more of the purchase price. It is rare for a commer-
cial lender to finance a commercial property with a zero-down payment (as
143Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
you might see in residential real estate). Because loans made on commercial
properties are much larger than on residential properties, commercial
lenders have stricter lending guidelines. So, because of the greater risks
involved, commercial lenders want the borrower to invest money or equity in
the property. This way, they share in some of the risks, or have some “skin in
the game” as it is sometimes called.
When purchasing a single-family home, on the other hand, the down pay-
ments can fluctuate. It may be 20 percent or more of the purchase price or it
may be as low as 0 percent. When the residential lender doesn’t require a
down payment, it means that the buyer has no equity in the property.
How Lenders Evaluate Properties
Commercial lenders are people of a different breed. (Think about it: They live
and die making decisions based on Excel spreadsheets.) They look at proper-
ties from a different point of view than the rest of us investors. So, it’s wise
for you to understand where they’re coming from when they reject your deal.
In this section, we help you to understand them, and we show you how to put
your best foot forward in getting your deal approved for the best loan.
In order to understand how lenders evaluate properties, you need to examine
their three main deal prequalifiers — the property’s income, the quality of
the property, and the strength of the borrower.
Determining the property’s income
Income is a vital ingredient to the lender’s approval process. Not only must
there be income, but there must also be enough income to satisfy paying the
mortgage and property operating expenses. Lenders measure this in two
ways as described in detail in the following sections: debt coverage ratio and
loan-to-value ratio.
Debt coverage ratio
A lender’s first checkpoint when determining a property’s income is the debt
coverage ratio, which is the ratio of net operating income to debt payments.
This ratio basically answers these questions: Does the property bring in
enough money to cover its mortgage or its debt? After paying all typical oper-
ating expenses, can the monthly income of the property adequately service
the monthly debt payment on the property? Here’s how the debt coverage
ratio is calculated:
Debt coverage ratio = net operating income ÷ annual debt service
144 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
Net operating income is the yearly gross income minus operating expenses.
However, don’t include any mortgage expenses in this number. Annual debt
service is the annual mortgage payments or monthly mortgage payments mul-
tiplied by 12. So, for example, if you have a monthly payment of $6,000, the
annual debt service is $6,000 × 12, which is $72,000.
Commercial lenders figure the debt coverage ratio because they require a
minimum ratio to approve a property for a loan. Many lenders have debt cov-
erage requirements that range from 1.1 to 1.35, but typically the minimum is
1.2. From the lender’s perspective, the higher the debt coverage ratio, the
more income that’s available to cover the debt payments, which means less
risk for her.
On the other hand, if the debt coverage ratio is less than 1, typically this means
that there isn’t enough net income to cover the debt payment. In this case,
you have negative cash flow, meaning that someone will be responsible for
digging deep in her pockets every month to cover the shortage in cash flow.
Here’s an example showing how to calculate the debt coverage ratio: Say that
a property generates a net operating income of $60,000 and the annual debt
service is $50,000. If you divide the net operating income by the annual
debt service, this gives you a debt coverage ratio of 1.2, which meets most
lender criteria.
145Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
You never know until you try
What if you find a deal but don’t have great
credit or lots of capital to invest? Relax. Most of
our Commercial Mentoring Program students
felt the same way when they started. Consider
Kim and Jose, who owned two single-family
rental homes and were struggling to make ends
meet because their rentals barely broke even.
They decided to sell one of their rental homes
and use the profits to purchase a well-built 61-
unit apartment complex.
The challenge was that Jose is retired and Kim
is your typical soccer mom who has been out
of work for a couple of years. How in the world
would they qualify to purchase a $2.2 million
apartment complex? If it was a $2.2 million
house there wouldn’t have been a chance for
them to qualify for a loan in their current finan-
cial situation. But because it was a commercial
property, getting the loan was possible. Jose
and Kim had two positive things going for them:
 The apartment complex was well-run and
cash flowed excellently.
 The current owner took excellent care of
the property and it looked great inside
and out.
These two key items caused the bank providing
the loan to overlook Jose and Kim’s weakness
in personal finances. As we’re writing this book,
Jose and Kim are still retired, and the couple
happily reports a cash flow of $96,000 per year
from their apartment complex.
Loan-to-value ratio
The loan-to-value ratio, commonly referred to as LTV, is an important factor in
the income of a property. A lender figures the loan-to-value ratio by compar-
ing the appraised value of the property to the size of the loan that you’re
requesting. This ratio is a percentage:
Loan to value ratio = mortgage amount ÷ appraised value of property
Commercial properties are valued for the most part by their net operating
incomes. The person who officially values the worth of the property for the
lender is called an appraiser. Your goal is to have the appraiser value your
property at least for the purchase price. Here’s a quick example of how to
figure the loan-to-value ratio:
75% = 600,000 ÷ 800,000
So, from this example, if the purchase price equaled the appraised value of
$800,000, the down payment or equity in the property would be $200,000, or
25 percent of the purchase price. In other words, the lender will provide a
loan for up to 75 percent of the appraised value of the property.
Typical loan-to-value ratios for the lenders are based on the income strength
of the property and the financial strength of the buyer. For example, if the
property has strong income and the buyers are strong financially, the loan-to-
value ratio requirement would be higher, thus requiring a lower down pay-
ment from the lender. Similarly, if the property has weak income and the
buyers aren’t that strong financially, the loan-to-value ratio would be lower
and would require a larger down payment from the lender.
A property that has a strong stream of income can help overcome a weak
buyer or buyers. And vice versa; financially strong buyers can help overcome
a weak property.
Revealing the quality of the property
Lenders take risks on properties they don’t manage themselves, so how they
deal with this is to lend on properties that are in reasonable physical and
financial condition. They also look at the type of tenant in the building. Are
they reliable payers, for example? Lenders go back in time and look at how
the property has been performing because that’s a good indication of how
risky lending money is going to be. This all has to do with the quality of the
property, and in this section, we touch on all the quality issues.
A lender looks at the following six specific areas when trying to determine
the quality of a property:
146 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
 Physical quality of the property: The lender rates the property accord-
ing to its present physical condition. For example, have you ever walked
onto a property that you wanted to purchase and realized immediately
that on a scale from 1 to 10, it was a negative 2? Your reaction was prob-
ably something like, “This property is not worth the amount that you
want, Mrs. Seller. It’s worth much less because of all the repairs and
maintenance that are needed.” Your lender rates property in much the
same way.
 Quality of the lease agreements: Lenders determine the quality of the
lease by looking at things such as lease renewal options, lease termina-
tion, the number of years that are on the lease, whether rent increases
are possible, and whether the lease payments include property tax,
insurance, and maintenance.
Some would say that when you purchase a commercial property what
you’re really purchasing are the leases and the property comes for free.
Of course this is an exaggeration, but the point here is that if the leases
are weak, the property is weak — at least in the lender’s eyes.
 Quality of the tenants: Lenders rate the tenants of a property based on
things such as the tenants’ financial strength and how long they have
been in business, just to name a few. If you were a lender, would you
rather lend on a building whose tenant is Wal-Mart or would you rather
lend on the building whose tenant is BJ’s Used Discount Mattresses?
As a lender, you have to decide which would be a high risk and which
would be a sure bet. If your choice of a sure bet is Wal-Mart, you get a
gold star!
 Historical performance of the property: We all have ups and downs in
our personal finances, and properties are no different. So, lenders rate
the quality of a property by how well it has been operating in the past.
Usually a lender favors a property that has at least 12 months of stable
operation. As you may have imagined, a rocky financial history can hurt
a property’s ability to get a loan. For instance, if an apartment building
had income collection problems and now isn’t operating to its potential,
because the income is lowered, the value placed on the property would
be lowered as well.
 Property occupancy: Do you recall the saying, “Build it and they will
come?” Well, in the commercial real estate business, the saying is, “Build
it, and then give them a reason to come.” If your property isn’t desirable
for any reason, you probably have a history of vacant space. Lenders
frown on vacancies. They look at the occupancy of a building as a desir-
ability factor. In fact, typically lenders want to see a property at least 90
percent occupied. Lenders have this type of mind-set: “If the property
stays full, it must be desirable, and if it’s desirable the income will be
consistent. I like the risk, so I’ll make a loan on it.”
 Market occupancy: Market occupancy is just as important as property
occupancy. Say, for example, that you want a loan on an apartment
building. In the neighborhood in which the property is located, every
147Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
apartment building is currently 95 percent occupied, but the apartment
building you want a loan on is 75 percent occupied. We don’t suggest
you try this, but if you do, the lender may require you to put up a higher
down payment to make this a less risky deal for her. On the other hand,
if the neighborhood occupancy has always been 75 percent, the lender
may consider not loaning on the property due to a weak market for ten-
ants to rent the available apartments.
 Rental concessions: This factor has to do with the quality of the market
just like market occupancy. Concessions are incentives to the tenants to
move in. These incentives rear their heads when the market is soft, and
they’re usually in the form of rental discounts. And if the lender sees
that concessions are ongoing, she’ll annualize the discounts and sub-
tract them from the gross income, which will affect the loan amount
approval. And you thought move-in specials were a good thing!
Assessing the strength of the borrower
Just like when you apply for a loan for a home, you have to apply in a similar
way for a commercial loan. The commercial lender uses this application
process to check out your financial strength.
While your financial strength as a borrower does come into play, remember
that it is priority number three. Here are the financial items that your lender
will check out:
 Liquid assets: The lender wants to determine your available cash, stocks,
securities, 401(k), and individual retirement accounts (IRAs). What
they’re looking for is your ability to come up with cash in emergencies.
 Credit score: A credit score of 680 or higher puts you in the A paper
class of loans available. The A paper category provides the best options
and best loan terms. A score of less than 680 puts you in a lower class
where the loans are a lot less attractive, including being more expensive
to get into. Moral of this story: Pay your bills on time!
If you have poor credit, there’s still hope for you to invest in commercial
real estate. One way is to have a limited liability company (LLC) purchase
the property. That way you can just own a part of the LLC. For example,
you can start an LLC with a bunch of partners (with good credit) to
invest with. Your poor credit will be overshadowed by the combined
credit of the partners. For more information on LLCs, see Chapter 10.
 Net worth: Lenders like it when your net worth equals the size of your
loan. The reason? Risk. Lenders feel it’s a good risk when what you are
worth equals what they themselves are putting at risk.
 Real estate investing experience: The number one cause of commercial
loan default is investor inexperience. So, if you have no experience, get a
partner who has some. Doing so will make you stronger and make you
148 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
seem like less of a risk. To help you in your cause, you can also hire an
experienced professional property management company to manage
the property.
 Money reserves: Lenders want you to have a minimum of three months
of loan payments in your savings account at the time of closing. They
require this backup cash just to make sure that you didn’t spend your
last dime on purchasing the property.
If you have shortcomings in any of the previous areas, find a person with high
net worth to be on your team. Lenders love it when a person who’s worth a
lot of money signs on the loan with you, just in case the property runs into
trouble and needs cash to fix the problem. As an exchange, that high net worth
person may want a percentage ownership, a fixed return, and/or a slice of
the profits.
Getting Your Lender to Say
“You’re Approved!”
Some of our long-time investment buddies really believe that getting your
commercial loan approved is like flipping a coin. They believe that getting
their lender to say “you’re approved” depends solely on what side the coin
lands on. Even though we understand their concern a bit (it certainly does
feel as if loan approval is a haphazard ordeal sometimes), we have to dis-
agree. And here’s why: We believe that, for the most part, you can control the
loan approval process.
Throughout the years that we’ve been investing in commercial real estate,
two things have consistently brought us success when working with commer-
cial lenders. Here they are:
 We bring the lender a good property, and if it isn’t a good property, we
include a plan of action to get the property to the “good” level. (For more
on getting a property in good shape, see Chapter 14.)
 We prepare ourselves and our team by compiling all the documentation
that we need for the approval process. For example, when you choose a
lender to work with, he’ll request a list of specific items from you. The
quicker you can get these items to him, the faster he can get started on
qualifying your property’s loan.
Because these tactics worked for us, we’re assuming that they’ll work for you
too. So, focus on putting yourself and your team in the best light for the lender.
Get the lender excited about you and your team and about guiding you on the
road to loan approval. And don’t forget to give him the appropriate information
at the appropriate times. We explain all of this in the upcoming sections.
149Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
What’s needed from you
To get started on your loan approval process, your lender will ask for some
information concerning you (the borrower) and your finances. These docu-
ments need to be given to your lender as soon as you have a signed purchase
contract in hand. These items from you set everything else into action and
headed toward approval. Here’s a list of things that the lender needs from you:
 A completed commercial loan application: You can get this document
from your chosen lender.
 Personal tax returns: Your lender will likely want two previous years of
your personal tax returns, including any schedules.
 Schedule of real estate owned: This schedule lists every piece of real
estate that you own. You can generate this list on your own or have your
CPA prepare it. On it, include the type of property, the address, when it
was acquired, what you paid for it and what you guess it’s worth today,
loan information, gross income, and total expenses.
 Escrow information: Send your lender the contact information of the
escrow/title company that will close the transaction. An attorney’s
office may handle the closing as well.
 Type of ownership entity: You need to provide your lender with the
type of ownership method or entity that you plan on closing with: LLC,
corporation, or LP. You can find information on how to choose the right
entity for your deal in Chapter 12.
What’s needed regarding the property
Besides needing info regarding you and your finances, your lender also needs
certain items concerning the property itself. She uses these documents to
start building a case of why this property is a good risk for the multimillion
dollar loan that you’re seeking. You need to get these items to her within five
days after the purchase contract is signed. Here’s a list of things that your
lender will request from you:
 Purchase contract: A copy of the purchase contract (rather than the
original) will do.
 Operating statements: Send statements for at least the two previous
years as well as the current year-to-date operating financial statements
for the property. There are two other names you might find these under:
income and expense statements and profit and loss statements. If the
property is brand new, you obviously won’t have any historical data. In
this case, you’ll have to make up your own statements much like you
would when building a budget of any sort.
150 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
 Property rent roll: A property rent roll is an “attendance list” of tenant
info, such as name, rent amount, square footage, and start and end dates
of the lease. You get this document from the seller.
 All property leases and rental agreements: Your lender needs copies of
every current lease or rental agreement.
 Preliminary title report of the property: You can order this report from
your escrow/title company or your closing attorney’s office.
 Six to 12 color photos of the property: You can give your lender more
pictures, but do make sure to include photos from the west, east, north,
and south and from the street.
What lenders like in a deal
Lenders are people too, don’t forget. They have feelings, and they have things
that they like and get excited about just as the rest of us do. So, when lenders
evaluate your deals, give them things that they can be excited about. Keep in
mind that the good-deal points can actually sometimes overshadow some of
the bad-deal points. Here are a few of those good-deal points that lenders
really like to see:
 Cash flow: Properties that have positive cash flow are a lender’s delight.
Lenders like these properties because they have the extra oomph to
overcome problems, such as your low credit score, being in a below-
average neighborhood, or having overdue repair needs on the property.
Remember the saying, “Cash is king,” because it surely applies here!
 A good purchase price: Lenders like it when you buy low. When you buy
low, your debt will be low, so your debt coverage ratio will be higher. The
higher the debt coverage ratio, the wider the smile on your lender’s face
(we discuss debt coverage ratio earlier in this chapter).
 Strong operating history: Remember the feeling of bringing home a date
that your parents actually liked? Well, if you bring a property to your
lender that has been operating really well for the past two or three years
(it has experienced stable or increasing income and low vacancy and
has been maintained well), you can expect your lender to greet you with
open arms — and an open wallet.
Commercial real estate is a business that’s based on relationships. More deals
and loan approvals are settled because of relationships than anything else.
You need to approach the lender with integrity, respect, and honesty. Get the
lender to like you by building a solid and friendly rapport as best you can.
151Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
What lenders don’t like in a deal
Most lenders that we know work diligently to get loans approved as quickly
as possible, but sometimes they’re faced with roadblocks that can cause your
loan to be declined. Many times, these roadblocks are especially frustrating
for lenders because they’re controllable problems. Here are the most
common problems that lenders hate to face:
 Insufficient financial records: This problem usually occurs when the
seller is unable to provide sufficient financial records of the property
due to disorganization or unwillingness.
 Discrepancies in the financial records: For example, say that a seller
provides an income/expense statement that shows that the property
produced $250,000 in income for the year, but the property tax returns
list the income as $200,000. Which document does the lender believe?
And if the actual income is $50,000 less than what he thought it brought
in, he’ll probably wonder whether it’s worth what he has already offered.
Findings like this definitely aren’t the way to get on your lender’s good
side.
 Hidden deferred maintenance: Lenders don’t like to play hide-and-seek
with the property’s maintenance and repairs. If they sense that either
party is playing this game, they’ll begin suspecting every part of the
process. And distrust isn’t a characteristic that you want in a person
who’s responsible for lending you hundreds of thousands or millions of
dollars — it can kill your deal very quickly.
So, in a nutshell, to keep yourself and your deal on the good side of the lender,
make sure the documents that are asked for by the lender and sent by you
are complete, accurate, and truthful.
Choosing the Best Loan for You
When choosing the best loan for your deal, it’s a lot like going out to buy a
new car. For instance, you probably go from dealership to dealership and
brand to brand to narrow your choices as best you can. You may even do
your shopping and comparisons on the Internet — that’s okay, too. But
sooner or later, you have to make a decision; you have to select which new
car to buy.
Choosing the best loan for your deal involves the same types of actions and
thoughts as buying that new car. First, you do your research on the different
lenders that are out there. Then you determine the types of loans that may
possibly suit your deal. Finally you decide on the type of loan that’s best for
the property based on why you’re buying the property. And along the way,
152 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
you need to get some understanding on how much the loan will cost you to
get into, how much it costs to get out, and what determines the interest rates
on your loan. We discuss all this and more in the following section.
Getting to know conventional lenders
First of all, what’s a conventional lender? A conventional lender is a source of
financing for your deal that’s usually from a commercial bank, a savings and
loan bank, an insurance company, a pension fund, a real estate investment
trust, or a mortgage broker. The following list breaks down these conven-
tional lenders and shows you what makes them tick:
 Commercial banks: These lenders like to lend locally. In their eyes, the
closer to their front door, the better. You can often find these lenders
acting as the financial backers of major neighborhood projects.
Commercial banks are pretty conservative in their lending. They won’t
hesitate to ask for higher down payments and they have overall strict
guidelines, including shorter loan terms. Believe it or not, it actually
helps you if you have a checking account at the bank in which you apply.
 Savings and loan banks: Even though they may have branches across
the nation or state, these banks like to lend locally. Their source of money
used to lend out comes from customer deposits and this is what enables
them to provide better rates than commercial banks. They have the
capability to do everything in-house (for example, processing, appraisal,
and closing), which can keep your out-of-pocket loan cost lower in com-
parison to a commercial bank. We’ve also found that these lenders allow
you to leverage yourself a bit more. What we mean by this is that they’re
a little more flexible on down payment requirements and on making other
exceptions to get the deal done, especially when it’s a property that they
have confidence in.
 Mortgage brokers: These guys take your file of information and, acting
as middlemen, they shop it to their financing sources, such as other
banks, mortgage bankers, insurance companies, real estate investment
trusts, and maybe even pension funds. Like using any other type of
broker, mortgage brokers can save you time and effort.
Mortgage brokers and most mortgage bankers work strictly on commis-
sions. So, if they don’t close your loan, they don’t get paid. On the other
hand, an employee of a bank gets paid whether your loan closes or not.
As you can see, it just makes sense to work with someone who’s moti-
vated to close your loan.
Mortgage brokers and mortgage bankers are the most flexible, so you’ll
find interest-only payment programs, programs that require very little
documentation, loans based on the market rents, and loans using a
lower debt coverage ratio — all under one roof. It’s one-stop shopping!
153Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
 Mortgage bankers: These lenders lend nationally and are know for
favorable interest rates and sell “wholesale” to mortgage brokers. Most
often they operate from a large financial institution’s line of credit. They
also quickly sell their loans after the close so they can lend out the same
money again.
 Insurance companies and pension funds: These lenders like to lend
only big money for long-term projects at very low rates. If you’re a big
player, shop here.
Besides only liking to lend out big dollars, the only other drawback to
these lenders is that they move like snails in getting your loan approved
and to closing.
 Real estate investment trusts (REITs): These lenders, which are known
as REIT funds, are a cross between a savings and loan bank and the
institutional lenders, such as an insurance company or pension fund.
Because they often invest by using pension and retirement funds, they
are extra cautious.
Understanding the available
conventional loans
Many different types of conventional loans are available for the different types
of commercial real estate. Here’s a list of the most commonly used loan
options and types:
 Long-term loans: These loans can go up to ten years in length at a fixed
interest rate. If you don’t plan on selling the property for a while, con-
sider a long-term loan. These loans are typically amortized for 30 years.
Long-term loans have an early payoff penalty, which is called a prepay-
ment penalty or defeasance payment. So, if you commit to a seven-year
loan, but want to sell the property in two years, you’ll be socked with a
substantial penalty for doing so. (See the later section, “Knowing the costs
of getting out of a loan,” for more details on this early payoff penalty.)
 Short-term loans: These types of loans are usually up to three years in
length and typically have lower interest rates than long-term loans. If
your investing strategy calls for you to sell the property in three years
or less, this may be the loan for you. These loans are amortized for less
than 30 years in most cases.
 Conduit loans: These loans are good for properties that are stable and
well established with solid tenants. Interest rates are usually low and
fixed with long amortization periods. And remember that these loans
can be nonrecourse. Nonrecourse means that the borrower isn’t person-
ally guaranteeing the loan. And not being liable for the loan just in case
something goes wrong is good for investors.
154 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
 U.S. government agency loans: Believe it or not, about 20 percent of all
commercial loans given in the United States are somehow tied to the gov-
ernment. For example, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), Fannie
Mae, and the Department of Housing and Development (HUD) are just a
few types of government loans available. But keep in mind that these
agencies aren’t lenders, they’re insurers. You must find a government-
approved lender who’s willing to grant this type of loan. These loans have
some of the most favorable terms, such as lower down payments, longer
loan terms, up to 40 years of amortization, and lower interest rates.
 Construction loans: These loans tell a story. They tell the story of how
you plan to construct a property. If the story isn’t a good one, the lender
won’t lend you the money. It’s that simple. These loans are taken out to
fund the building of a property to completion or until certain leasing
percentages are met. With these loans you usually have a timed payout
or a scheduled draw where funds are released for construction as you
build. Interest-only payments and loan terms of only one to three years
in length are normal.
 Take-out loans: A takeout loan is the loan that comes after your con-
struction financing. It’s a permanent loan that goes onto the property. It
can be a long-term, short-term, conduit, or government loan.
 Mezzanine loans: These loans combine themselves with permanent or
construction loans. Most banks won’t exceed 80 percent loan-to-value,
and so that’s where these loans come in. They stack themselves, hence
“mezzanine” on top to achieve loan-to-values as high as 90 percent
financing. Large projects, such as skyscrapers and large shopping cen-
ters, which cost tens to hundreds of millions of dollars, use mezzanine
financing.
One important characteristic of this type of loan is that it’s secured not
by a mortgage or deed of trust, but by holding a security agreement
against the owner’s stock in the LLC. If the owner defaults on the loan,
the lender takes the stock that owns the building.
 Bridge loans: These loans are sometimes referred to as gap financing or
opportunity loans. Short-term financing is used to bridge the gap
between finding a permanent loan and actually closing on a permanent
loan. These loans are useful in funding deals quickly, but they can be
costly due to their effectiveness in allowing you to capitalize on a deal
that you otherwise wouldn’t have been able to.
 Small Business Administration (SBA) loans: If you plan to occupy at
least 51 percent of the property yourself, check out an SBA loan. With
these loans, a down payment that’s as little as 10 percent is possible if
you have a stable property. Another benefit is that the interest rates will
be lower than a conventional loan. You can also use this type of loan as
a construction loan if you plan to occupy at least 60 percent of the prop-
erty. But remember that SBA loans aren’t made by the Small Business
Administration — it merely insures the loans. So, you have to go to an
SBA-approved lender to actually receive the loan.
155Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
 Stated income/no documentation loans: If you have no job, but you
have a home with equity and good credit, getting a loan for your com-
mercial property is still possible. Stated income and no documentation
loans (also called no doc loans) don’t require borrowers to show proof
of monthly income or income tax returns. However, the property must
have a high cash flow and be in excellent condition. In the right condi-
tions, 85 percent loan-to-value is possible.
 Hard money loans: If you have bad credit, had a recent bankruptcy, or
the property needs to close in a few weeks, you can use a hard money
loan. These lenders usually require a hefty down payment (35 percent
or more), and have exceptionally high interest rates (12 percent to 18
percent), and three to ten points. However if you find a deal of a lifetime,
have no time left on the clock, and need money yesterday, this may be
the way to go.
Selecting a lender for your deal
Remember buying your first house? You had to choose a Realtor or broker
to work with who could show you homes and educate you on the market-
place. You called a few and interviewed a few. Some called you back, some
didn’t. Some were really nice, but they just didn’t have the experience you
desired. Some had the experience, but your relationship didn’t click. Choosing
a lender is exactly the same. But don’t worry. We have a few tips to get you
started in selecting qualified lenders. Here they are, in no particular order:
 Find out how much experience your lender has. We prefer not to use a
lender who’s new to the business of commercial lending no matter what
institution she works out of. Also, consider working with a lender outfit
that focuses on commercial lending only. The lenders in these types of
outfits have more focused experience than those who work in both resi-
dential and commercial lending.
 Do your homework. Although we appreciate the first lender that returns
our phone call, we tend to avoid going with the very first one. We prefer
to get several bids for our project. So, do some homework on each,
making sure that they’ve been in the business for several years and are
familiar with the type of property that you’re buying. Ask for references
as well.
 Find out if he or she is your type. No, this tip has nothing to do with
dating. Instead, we mean that you should make sure that your lender has
relevant experience in putting together loans and closing loans of your
product type. If you’re purchasing an apartment building, for example, it
makes much more sense to use a lender who specializes in apartments
rather than one who specializes in construction financing.
156 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
 Determine what your prospective lender can and can’t do. Some
lenders only lend locally and some lend in all 50 states. Some lend on
apartments and retail properties, but don’t lend on office buildings or
warehouses. So, get a good idea of what you need and then ask ques-
tions to find out if your prospective lender has what it takes.
 Remember that actions speak louder than words. If a particular lender
has the best rates and terms in town but is slow in returning your phone
calls, doesn’t answer your questions well, or is rude on occasion, she’s
telling you who she really is. Believe her! Just because she comes recom-
mended or has a good product, her behavior is telling you how she’ll
treat you when you get farther along in the process. If she treats you not
so great now, can you imagine what behavior will emerge when there’s a
bump in the road?
Deciding what you want
out of your property
You can actually turn a good deal into a stinky deal by choosing the wrong
type of loan for your property (see the earlier section, “Understanding the
available conventional loans,” for more on the different types of loans avail-
able). Taking the time to create a game plan for your property is critical
because it allows you to determine what you want out of the property. And
when you know what you want out of your property, you can decide what
type of loan is appropriate. What you want out of your property or the reason
you’re buying the property is called your exit strategy.
We recommend that you ask yourself the following exit strategy questions
before you begin searching for your loan. Asking yourself these questions and
answering them thoughtfully and thoroughly will allow you to determine what
types of loans you should consider and research further:
 Is this loan for a construction project or for a property that’s already
standing?
 What’s my long-term or short-term investment strategy?
 Am I going to refinance at some point?
 How important is the interest rate to my strategy?
Share your answers with the lenders that you plan to interview so they can
help you decide which type of loan is the best for your situation.
157Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
Determining how much
the loan will cost you
Commercial real estate investing has fees everywhere you turn. If it were pos-
sible to charge a fee for breathing air in an office building, believe us, some-
one would do it. Fees on loans are no different. Lenders charge what they call
points on the loan. For example, a one-point fee charge means that the fee will
be one percentage point of the loan amount. The higher the risk and compli-
cation for the lender, the higher the points charged to the borrower. We’ve
seen lenders charge up to six points in conventional loans.
Here’s a quick example. Say you’re borrowing $1 million to purchase a corner
strip shopping center. The lender will typically charge you an origination fee
of one point or 1 percent of $1 million. The fee would be $10,000.
Don’t think you’re out of the woods yet. You’re sure to run into many other
types of loan fees or out-of-pocket costs in order to close your deal success-
fully. Here are the most common ones:
 Appraisal report fees: Lenders often order appraisals to be performed
on properties. These appraisals can cost from $1,500 to $5,000 or more,
depending on the size and type of the property. If it’s a land deal where
construction is involved, fees can be thousands of dollars more because
appraisers must make sure that the land can accommodate your build-
ing needs.
 Environmental surveys and reports: Lenders want to protect themselves
if your property has any type of potential hazardous wastes in its imme-
diate surroundings — for example, gas stations come to mind. So, to
protect themselves, they order environmental inspections. A Phase I
environmental inspection costs $1,500 to $4,000. If the building requires
Phase II inspection, which is a higher level of testing, expect to pay
$3,500 to $10,000.
 Property inspection: You can expect your lender to send out field inspec-
tors to inspect your property’s physical condition. During this inspection,
the inspector will check roofs, the parking lot, the structure, and the
interior. He’ll also check for any pest infestations. Expect to pay around
$500 for this inspection.
 Due diligence: Lenders often run credit and background checks to gauge
your credit worthiness. This can cost several hundred to a few thousand
dollars depending on how many signers are on the loan. This is just a
part of the lender’s due diligence on you.
 Legal review: To protect themselves, lenders often have their attorneys
review in-depth items, such as loan documentation, entity formation,
and exceptions and waivers, and title and survey reviews (just to name a
few). The cost of this legal review ranges from $500 to $1,000 depending
on the size and complexity of the deal.
158 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
 Document preparation: As you probably know, commercial real estate
lenders get buried in paper on daily basis. So, they have staff members
that review your deal from A to Z and prepare all of your documents for
closing. This document preparation can take several days and costs
range from $300 to $1,000.
 Application and processing: Don’t forget the application fee! Lenders
charge you for applying for the loan as well as for their time spent pro-
cessing the loan. You can expect to pay from $50 to $2,000 in application
and processing fees.
Don’t be shocked at the closing table! As early in the process as possible, bug
your lender for an estimate of your costs to close. Ask your commercial lender
to give you a preapproval letter that lists and estimates the interest rate and
all the loan expenses. If you don’t, you may be shocked to find out that the
cost to close your loan may be up to 2–3 percent of the loan amount. So be
prepared to inquire about your closing costs and then budget appropriately.
You can negotiate lender fees. The stronger the borrower you are, the more
leverage you have in negotiating the lender fees. Don’t be afraid to bargain.
And, if necessary, take your business elsewhere if you feel that the lender is
bombarding you with junk fees.
Knowing the costs of getting out of a loan
You may expect the usual upfront costs to close a loan, but what about the
costs to get out of the loan by either selling the property or refinancing it?
Just because you don’t think about these costs doesn’t mean that they aren’t
there! Don’t overlook these costs because if you do, it can cost you very big
dollars.
Nearly all commercial lenders charge borrowers a penalty if they decide to
pay off a loan before the loan term ends, especially in the first one to three
years. This penalty is commonly called a prepayment penalty for us normal
investors, but the more sophisticated ones like to use the term defeasance
structure.
Here’s how it works on a typical loan: Let’s say that your loan amount is
$500,000. If you sell or refinance your property in the first year, your typically
your prepayment penalty would be up to 5 percent of the loan amount, or in
this case, $25,000. In the second year, it would be 4 percent, or $20,000. In the
third and following years, the penalty would go down 1 percent each year
until you reach year five, which would be 0 percent.
As you can see, you can lose out on some serious cash if you decide to pay
off your loan early. So pay attention to the prepayment penalties when you’re
selecting a loan.
159Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
A way to sidestep the prepayment penalty and still be able to sell your prop-
erty is to make sure that your loan can be assumed by the next buyer (see
the later section, “Assuming the Seller’s Preexisting Mortgage,” for more on
these types of takeovers). In this case, the next buyer would also be assum-
ing the existing loan terms. In fact, this buyer would essentially be stepping
into your shoes! You get to move on, the buyer gets the property, and the
lender gets to keep the loan intact. Everybody’s happy.
Controlling the interest
rate (to some extent)
I (coauthor Peter Harris) have always found it intriguing to discover what
makes interest rates change from property to property, from deal to deal, or
from investor to investor. I finally realized that I had more control over interest
rates than I knew I had. Of course, I have no control over the Federal Reserve
Board, the bond market, the economy, or the lender’s portfolio, but I’ve fig-
ured out how to maneuver interest rates to work in and around my deals.
These are the items that you (the borrower) can control, which in turn affect
the interest rate of your loan:
 Property type and risk: If you were a bank, which is the riskier loan: A
loan for an apartment building that’s 100 percent occupied or a loan for
a gas station in the middle of desert country? You guessed it. If the gas
station closed down and the bank foreclosed on it, how difficult would it
be to sell or rent it? We’re guessing pretty difficult. But, with an apart-
ment that’s 100 percent full, you shouldn’t have a problem.
What this all boils down to for you is that the gas station (or any other
risky investment) is likely to have a higher interest rate. So, in other
words, unless you have a good reason for going with a high-risk prop-
erty, stick with those that are more conservative.
 Loan amount: Lenders like to lend big bucks. Believe it or not, the
amount of paperwork for a $10 million loan is the same as a $300,000
loan. But guess what? The interest rate could be over 3 percent higher
on the smaller loan. The bigger the loan, the lower the interest rate.
Think big.
 Creditworthiness: Just like with residential loans, the stronger the bor-
rowers are, the lower the interest rate is. Strong borrowers are lower
risks. So, pay your bills on time if you’re looking for a good interest rate!
 Age of property: Again, it comes down to risk. Lenders make a direct
connect between newer properties and low risk. The newer the prop-
erty, the lower the interest rate.
160 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
 Prepayment penalty option: If you want to secure the option of paying
your loan off early without being socked with the normal prepayment
penalty, you’ll have to pay a higher interest rate.
 Loan-to-value: The more equity you have in your property, the lower the
risk is for your lender — the lower the risk, the lower the interest rate.
So, to gain that much-needed equity, put a larger down payment down.
 Terms factor: When it comes to loan terms, you have two things to
consider. First, the shorter in years your terms are, say three years as
opposed to ten years, the lower the interest rate. As for years of amorti-
zation, here’s the general guideline: The shorter the duration, the lower
the interest rate.
 Lender/broker points: You can pay down your interest rate consider-
ably by paying more points on the loan at closing. In other words, if you
agree to pay the lender more points, she’ll lower your interest rate. (See
the earlier section, “Determining how much the loan will cost you,” for
more on the point system.)
Interest rates are negotiable between you and the lender. Otherwise, why
would they vary from lender to lender on the same property with the same
borrowers? It’s because one lender is cutting you a better deal, that’s why.
Get out there and start negotiating!
Assuming the Seller’s
Preexisting Mortgage
Let’s say that you’re selling your property. The purchase price is $1 million
and you have an $800,000 mortgage balance. The loan has a term of seven
years and was originated only last year. Because the loan is a new one, the
prepayment penalty is 5 percent of the mortgage balance, or $40,000. If you
sell the property and the buyer gets a new loan on it, you’ll have to pay a
$40,000 penalty just to sell the property. Ouch.
How do you sell your property and avoid paying the prepayment penalty?
The solution is this: Have the buyer assume your loan (this is called a loan
assumption). What we mean is have the buyer assume all of your loan obliga-
tions, including the balance, interest rate, years remaining on the loan, pre-
payment penalty structure, and monthly payments. Basically, the buyer will
be walking into your loan and taking it over. The cost for the buyer to assume
your loan is a down payment, which is the difference between the purchase
price and loan balance ($200,000 in this case), and a 1 to 2 percent loan bal-
ance assumption fee. Your cost would be nothing more than the traditional
transaction costs. Cool, eh?
161Chapter 8: Conventional Financing Options
The following two lists are the general guidelines that you can follow when
deciding whether you should assume a loan.
Advantages to assuming a loan:
 The loan exists already, so you save time and money by not having to
apply for a new loan.
 The existing loan terms may be much better than today’s loan terms.
 Possibility of leveraging yourself into the property by having a down
payment of only the difference between the purchase price and what
the seller owes.
Reasons you may not want to assume a loan:
 Existing loan terms aren’t better than what a new loan would have.
 A large down payment is required or the loan is due soon.
When you’re considering assuming a loan with supposedly favorable terms,
pay close attention to the loan’s amortization period. We almost assumed
a loan with no assumption fee, but upon a deeper check, we found that the
loan amortized over 15 years. When we calculated what our monthly pay-
ments would be on a 30-year amortization period, our payments would be 25
percent lower than on a 15-year amortization period. We’re glad we did our
homework!
162 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
Chapter 9
Getting Creative with Financing
In This Chapter
 Surveying creative financing techniques
 Using the Master Lease technique
 Getting the owner to carry the financing
 Finding secondary financing
 Investing with your own equity
Would you like to buy a commercial property and get the owner to help
you out with most of the financing? How about buying a property
without using any of your own cash or credit? Sound too much like a late-
night infomercial? Well, it’s not. Creative financing is just what you’ve been
waiting for. You can use these ideas or not, but you only need to do one or
two big deals like this to retire fast.
You may have read our book Making Big Money Investing in Foreclosures
Without Cash or Credit. If so, then you know how to buy houses without using
your own money. Similarly, this chapter talks about how to buy a big com-
mercial property without using any of your hard-earned dollars.
You won’t put one of these creative deals together every single day. They take
plenty of hard work, a willingness to learn from others, and plenty of desire
that keeps you after it until you succeed. Is it worth the hard work and dedi-
cation? We think so.
This chapter covers the “creative” ways of funding your commercial deals
without having to go to a bank or fill out big piles of paperwork to get a con-
ventional loan. Commercial properties are bought and sold every day using
the seven different ways we cover here to invest without using your own cash
or having to talk to a commercial lender.
Creative Financing Techniques
Creative financing is any method of funding other than making a down pay-
ment and getting a new loan for the balance of your purchase price. Because
you can often structure creative financing so that you get in using little or
none of your money, you’ll come to love these techniques just like we do!
One of the risks of discovering creative financing is that it can cause you to
want to creatively fund every single deal that you do. While this is a worthy
goal, many of the deals that we’re finding right now are great deals even with-
out creative terms. Don’t bypass a deal just because it may require conven-
tional financing.
Here are the most common creative financing techniques:
 Master Lease technique: This method is often used with an owner who
doesn’t want to pay taxes on the gain from the official sale of his prop-
erty, yet he’s tired of being an owner. The investor agrees to pay the
owner a set lease payment every month. Typically the investor is going
to run the property, including collecting all the income and paying all
the expenses associated with the property over a three to five year
period. The reason you’d want to do this is that you also get an option
to purchase the property, usually at about its current value. Your goal is
then to increase the value and the cash flow as much as possible.
 Owner carry firsts: Why go to a lender for your loan when the seller
might be willing to be the “Banker” for you. We purchased one property
in California where the seller carried back $560,000 at 5 percent interest
for five years. This was better financing than we could get anywhere
else, and the low interest rate allowed the property to have an excellent
cash flow.
 Owner carry seconds: Whether you’re taking over an existing first mort-
gage or getting new financing, having the seller carry back all or a good
portion of the balance of the purchase price can sometimes make or
break the deal for you. We love to get sellers to agree to “investor-
friendly” terms like low or no interest for the first few years. Some of our
Mentorship students have persuaded sellers to carry back seconds with
no payments at all for the first two years.
 Other sources of secondary financing: What if you can’t get the seller
to carry back a second mortgage? Then you might look to either a con-
ventional lender (which doesn’t fit our definition of “creative”) or find a
private lender who will provide the funds for your second mortgage.
 Wraparound mortgages: Wraps are instances where the seller gets
one big payment from the investor every month to cover both a
second mortgage due to the seller and the amount due on the existing
first mortgage. This allows the seller to make certain that payments are
164 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
made on all loans and if payments aren’t made, the seller has the right
to foreclose to get the property back. Sometimes the seller gets a little
extra interest if the first mortgage has a lower rate than the wraparound
mortgage.
 Options: Options are one of our favorite methods to buy properties. An
option is simply an agreement with a property owner that gives you the
right to buy at a set price for a certain time period. Sellers will give you
an option in exchange for an upfront payment, ongoing payments such
as covering the property taxes for them, or as an extra something that
was perhaps thrown in along with another property that you bought
from them.
 Blanket mortgages: A blanket mortgage is a mortgage where you offer a
seller or traditional lender the added security of the equity in other
properties you own as collateral for the loan he or she gives you. This is
important to creative financing because sometimes when you’re financ-
ing 100 percent of your purchase price, the seller or lender that you’re
dealing with will be smart enough to insist on having additional proper-
ties to secure his or her interest just in case you don’t make the payments.
 Investing using IRAs: Did you know that you can invest in real estate
using your IRA money? Most people don’t know this. While there are
some rules to follow that restrict what you can and can’t do, using your
retirement funds and encouraging your friends to do the same can be
profitable and much more fun than investing in boring mutual funds.
Creative financing isn’t just about talking sellers into doing something that’s
good for you. The secret is to discover how your creative terms can get the
seller exactly what she wants out of the deal. You see, many owners of com-
mercial property have this little problem: They don’t want to pay tax on the
gains that they have in their property. Using creative financing is one of
the quickest, easiest ways to solve the seller’s problem, and get a great deal
for yourself.
The Master Lease Technique
With a Master Lease, you pay the owner a set amount as a lease payment each
month, and then you run the property just like you own it. You lease out the
space, collect the rents, and oversee and pay for the maintenance and repairs.
Your option price is typically set at an amount equal to the value of the prop-
erty at the beginning of your Master Lease.
Using the Master Lease technique, we were able to come in and buy a com-
mercial property from a seller who was scared to death to sell because he
didn’t want to pay the capital gains tax on all the money he had made in his
property over the years. So, instead of buying the property, we leased the
165Chapter 9: Getting Creative with Financing
property from the owner, and negotiated an option to purchase the property
within the next ten years. We closed the deal on the 1st of October and our
first payment wasn’t due to the seller until the 15th of that month. Because of
this payment schedule, we were able to collect enough money from tenants
who were already in the property to make the first payment to the seller.
Over the next three or four years, we never put any of our own money into
the property. We used the cash flow from the property to take care of all the
costs of running the building and fixing it up over time.
Four years later when we determined what the property was worth, our option
price was $600,000 less than the value of the commercial property. So, we
decided to go ahead and exercise our option at that point. We simply called
up a lender from our network and got a new loan to pay off the seller. Because
we rolled the new loan fees into the loan, we still don’t have a dime of our
money invested into this deal.
When using the Master Lease technique, make sure that you record a perfor-
mance mortgage against the property. This document allows you to enforce
your right to purchase at your option price, even if the seller changes his
mind. It cost us hundreds of thousands of dollars in lost profits until we dis-
covered how to use this important document. (Find samples of this and other
commercial agreements at www.investingforms.com.)
Cleve is a coach in our Commercial Mentoring Program who has been a com-
mercial broker for the past 27 years. His advice is to listen hard to find out
what the seller really needs. For example, he found a seller several years ago
who wanted to sell for $700,000 so he could move his equity into another
property. Cleve realized the seller had not found the new property yet. Cleve
offered to lease the property for $3,500 per month, and got an option to pur-
chase for five years at $640,000. This arrangement gave the owner more time
to look for a replacement property because the owner wanted to exchange
into another property rather than an outright sale. Cleve also shrewdly nego-
tiated to get half of the lease payment every month applied towards the pur-
chase price for the first two years. After Cleve was able to fix up the property
a bit and increase the rents, the cash flow was $60,000 per year. Last month
Cleve had an offer to purchase the property for $1.8 million.
Getting Someone to Carry
Secondary Financing
Some of the sellers that you come across won’t want to get their money out
upfront because they want to get completely out of real estate investing.
When you structure a deal where the owner carries back a first mortgage for
all or most of the financing, you’ll make monthly payments at whatever inter-
est rate(s) you’re able to negotiate with the seller.
166 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
The seller is able to get a return by charging the investor interest, and she
also only pays taxes on her capital gain based on the principal amount
received each year. If you’re a good negotiator, you can often get great terms,
such as starting out at a lower interest rate for the first two to six years. You
get the cash flow you need in the first few years and the seller gets her prop-
erty sold. Everybody wins.
Any time that you’re making payments to the seller of a property, make sure
that the promissory note includes a “first right of refusal” clause that allows
you to buy the note in case the seller (or the seller’s heirs) ever want to cash
out of the note. We like to use the special wording used on the promissory
note from www.investingforms.com so that any other investor is hesitant
to offer very much to buy the note. This one idea has made us tens of thou-
sands in extra profits.
Getting the Owner to Carry Seconds
and Other Secondary Financing
Most commercial real estate purchases require getting a new first mortgage
to buy the commercial property or leaving the existing first mortgage in
place. Then you have the seller carry back part of the purchase price as a
second mortgage. That’s called secondary financing. You can also get sec-
ondary financing from outside lenders or one of the private lenders in your
network.
Why secondary financing works
One of our favorite methods of buying properties is to buy them subject to
the existing first mortgage. That way, you don’t have to go out and find a new
loan. And then you can have the seller to carry back secondary financing on
top of the existing first mortgage.
The fastest way to increase the cash flow from a property is to refinance it
with financing that has a lower interest rate. You already have lenders with
good rates, you say? Guess what? The right sellers will give you even lower
interest rates! This fact applies to properties where the seller carries back all
the financing or properties that the seller provides secondary financing for.
The key is being able to negotiate what we call “soft terms” with the seller of
the property. Your goal is to see if you can get the seller to carry back sec-
ondary financing with below-market interest rates, no payments for the first
year or two, or maybe graduated payments. The end result is that your pay-
ments are lower, and you end up with more cash flow. That’s what it’s all
about, right?
167Chapter 9: Getting Creative with Financing
One of the really cool things about commercial properties is that you can often
find sellers who don’t want all cash when they sell their property. Why? If you
give the seller cash for the property, he suddenly has two big problems:
 The seller will have to pay tax on the gains made.
 The seller has to find something else to invest his money in.
You can solve both of these problems for the seller by using creative financ-
ing. After all, when you have a seller carry back secondary financing, you
can structure the payment stream in any fashion that both you and the seller
agree to. Think of the options: no payments, pure principal payments, interest-
only payments . . . the sky is the limit.
Pay attention when talking with owners of commercial property to notice
what their “needs” are versus what their “wants” are. After you discover what
the seller really needs what he’s going to do with the cash (or what immedi-
ate problem they hope to solve with the cash), you’re much closer to putting
your creatively financed deal together. A good question to ask when negotiat-
ing secondary financing is: “Help me out here, Mr. Seller. What can we do to
make sure that the property generates the income that I need to turn the
property around while still meeting your needs?”
Finding sources of secondary financing
Deciding on getting a new first mortgage, taking over or assuming payments
on an existing first mortgage, and picking any secondary financing is often a
matter of where can you get the best terms. You’re going to compare the
interest rates, length of the loan, upfront costs, and so on that you can nego-
tiate with the various sources here to make your decision.
Secondary financing, other than owner carry, is going to usually have a
higher interest rate than the first mortgage on the property. The reason for
this is that there is obviously higher risk for someone who’s secured in
second position as opposed to being secured by the first mortgage.
We’ve found that when we can get the seller to carry back secondary financ-
ing, the terms are always better than anywhere else. The reason for this is
that the seller is a part of the transaction and is emotionally motivated to
make the sale. If the seller doesn’t have immediate need for the money, she
can get a nice return so that it’s a good investment for her as well.
Commercial seconds
If you’re buying a nice property, a number of lenders are out there that are
willing to lend you money to be used as secondary financing. With money
that you get from a commercial lender for secondary financing, you can
168 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
expect to pay points, fees, and generally a higher interest rate than you would
when you get the financing someplace else.
Owner carry seconds
Okay, we admit it. Getting sellers to carry back financing is one of our all-time
favorite financing sources. That’s why we keep talking it up so much for you.
We’ve even put together deals where sellers have provided secondary financ-
ing and the property was 100 percent financed.
Private lenders
If you can’t get the seller to carry back secondary financing, your next best
source may be private lenders. Private lenders are comfortable with real
estate and are looking for safe returns on their investments. Obviously
they’re in second position, which isn’t as safe as having a first mortgage, so
you can expect to pay private lenders a higher interest rate than you would
on first mortgage money.
The advantage of working with private lenders is that they will come in and
quickly finance a deal for you. This allows you to close quickly, and “steal” a
property that other investors may not be able to get their funding in place to
buy right away.
The key here is to make sure that you’re working with people that know you
and trust you. Don’t waste your time trying to work with strangers who
don’t know what you’re about, don’t understand that you have integrity,
and don’t know you as a person.
Understanding common pitfalls
of secondary financing
One of the biggest pitfalls of secondary financing that you find is that if you
have the property highly financed, you may end up having negative cash flow.
This might be okay for a short period of time, such as when you do a turn-
around, but in the long term, you need to have an upside. There’s nothing like
a property taking longer to turn than expected, or having an unexpected shift
in the marketplace, that puts you in a position where you’re becoming a moti-
vated seller because you have to cover negative cash flow.
Depending on where you get your secondary financing, you may end up
paying higher interest rates than you will on your first mortgage. If you get
the seller to carry back the financing, oftentimes you can structure terms
where you get great interest rates.
169Chapter 9: Getting Creative with Financing
For one shopping center that we bought several months ago, we were able to
get the seller to carry back over $900,000 of secondary financing with an
interest rate that was just over 3 percent. Oftentimes the interest rate on the
secondary financing can be what makes or breaks a deal.
Getting the owner to help you out by
financing all or part of the purchase
When you’re trying to get an owner to help you out with creative financing,
remember this: Many owners of commercial real estate, especially those who
are getting older, often want monthly cash flow rather than just a big chunk of
money from the sale. We have found that if you can connect with the owner,
and get him to relate to you as if you’re a younger version of himself, he will
often get an emotional thrill out of giving you an opportunity to purchase his
property. It harkens him back to the days when he was seeking and receiving
his own financing breaks.
If you agree to cash out the seller when you resell the property, and you give
him some kind of a timeline, you’ll give the seller an optimistic projection.
Doing so will also indicate that you’re going to want to make your money as
You can also agree to cash out the seller after a certain number of years
(whether you’re selling or not). You can do that by using an all-inclusive trust
deed (AITD) with a balloon note. This AITD says that you’re going to cash out
the existing loan balances within five or seven years.
When you’re trying to convince a seller to take the bait on cashing out after a
certain number of years, say something like this:
Because I’m a conservative investor Mr. Seller, and I’m not a real risk-taker,
I want to make sure that I have enough time to get the property value up
and do the improvements and things that I talked about doing. Here’s the
170 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
Sellers want price, you want your terms
We’re amazed at the number of property
owners who are stuck on price when they’re
selling their properties. We think it boils down
to this: At some point, every property owner
starts to think “Wow! This property that I bought
for $2 million 15 years ago now has a value
that’s close to $4 million.” The truth of the matter
is that the property may be worth only about
$3.6 or $3.7 million.
The secret is to put together offers that give the
seller his price but that have great terms — like
no interest for the first two years. Look for a way
to make cash flow, not get stuck on price.
worse case scenario: Let’s say that the market really flattens out. I’d want to
make sure that I’ve got at least another couple of years beyond the time that
we’ve already talked about to make sure that I can get you your money.
Dealing with seller objections
When negotiating, sellers are more than likely going to raise some objections
to some of your creative financing options. But don’t worry: This section
shows you how to respond and change their minds.
Objection 1: “I don’t want to master lease it; I just want to sell it”
When this objection comes up (using the Master Lease technique), the sell-
ers are usually thinking about their families. They want their families to be
able to keep the money that they leave when they die. This way, they don’t
have the hassle of dealing with any of the investments.
You can either switch gears and buy the property subject to the existing
financing, or point out how much the Master Lease will save the seller’s
family in taxes. By delaying the sale beyond when the seller dies, the family
usually saves tens if not hundreds of thousands in taxes.
Objection 2: “I want a larger down payment”
When this objection comes up, it’s important for the seller to understand that
you can put a larger down payment into the property, but the more money
you put down, the lower the price is going to be. You may want to ask the
seller to step into your shoes. Here’s how:
Investor: This property here is a million-dollar property and you’re asking
me for 20 percent down. That’s $200,000. If you were me — a young
investor just getting started — and you could go out and buy four or five
other properties with that same money, isn’t that what you would do?
Seller: Yeah, I guess you’re right. I would probably do the same thing.
Investor: I thought so. That’s the real reason it doesn’t make sense for me
to use that large of a down payment. Because one of your concerns is
security and making sure I’m going to take good care of the property per-
haps we should talk about some ways that we can help you to feel more
secure about the transaction.
To help a seller feel secure, try this: “If we don’t make the payments on this
property, we will not only allow you to come in and take back the property that
we’re buying, but we’ll also allow you to take this other nice property that we
have lined up.” This is called a blanket mortgage. Sometimes it’s a great way
for you to get in a property with a smaller down payment.
171Chapter 9: Getting Creative with Financing
Objection 3: “I need a higher purchase price”
When you hear this objection, you need to remember one thing: The neat
thing with real estate is that there are so many different ways to structure
your profit in a transaction that you can often give the seller exactly what she
wants and still make a healthy and significant profit for yourself.
For example, one of the things that you can do is give the seller her price but
make sure that you get terms that are good for you. Those terms will help
you make a good profit on the property. Use these language patterns to
create a context for them to give you a great price on the property. Here’s
what it would sound like:
Investor: Well, you’re asking for $974,000 for this property Mrs. Seller.
What did you realistically expect to get out of the property?
Seller: $974,000 — that’s my asking price.
Investor: What did you really expect to get out of the property?
Seller: $900,000.
Investor: That makes sense. If a broker brought you a buyer who was will-
ing to pay that full asking price of $900,000, you would probably say no,
correct? You would probably turn it down?
Seller: No, I’d sell it anyway — if he would want to buy it or sell it with an
agent. I’ll sell it to anyone who wants to buy it. (This allows you to then
discount the price further by subtracting the amount the seller would be
willing to pay to a real estate agent.)
Operating the Wraparound
Mortgage Like a Surgeon
When you’re buying a property subject to the existing financing, one of the
seller’s biggest concerns is that if you don’t make the payments on the first
mortgage, the seller is going to be liable for the default on the existing loan.
When you’re selling a property, you’ll have the same concern if you’re leaving
the existing financing in place and carrying back a second mortgage.
To protect the seller’s interests and give him the comfort level that allows
him to move ahead with the deal, you can use something known as a wrap-
around mortgage. In some places, this is known as an “AITD,” which stands
for “all-inclusive trust deed.” To keep things simple here, we refer to these as
wraparound mortgages.
To understand how this mortgage works, here’s an example: Say that you’ve
negotiated with the owners of a small strip center to purchase their property
172 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
subject to the existing financing and the owners are willing to carry back sec-
ondary financing to help you get the deal closed. Here’s what the numbers
look like:
Purchase price: $2 million
Down payment: $200,000
Owner carry second: $300,000
Existing first mortgage: $1.5 million
The owner carry second in this example is going to be written up as a wrap-
around mortgage. The reason it’s called a wraparound mortgage in this case
is that this mortgage is going to “wrap around” both the owner carry second
and the existing first mortgage of $1.5 million. The way this works is simple:
The paperwork is set up so that you send an amount equal to your payment
on the owner carry second and your payment on the existing first mortgage
directly to the owner.
Here’s where it all starts to make sense: The owner then takes the amount
necessary to make the payment on the first mortgage out of the money that
you sent and forwards it to the first mortgage holder. In this case, the owner
is protected because he’s able to make sure that the payments are made on
the existing first mortgage before they’re made on the owner carry. In addi-
tion, if you don’t make the payments to cover both the first and second mort-
gages (which are really wrapped together in one mortgage now), the owner
has the right to foreclose against the property. This way he protects his inter-
est in his owner carry second and any liabilities he may have from the first
mortgage.
Using an Option to Buy
Options are simply an agreement with a property owner that gives you the
right to buy at a set price for a certain time period. Sellers will give you an
option in exchange for an upfront payment, ongoing payments such as cover-
ing the property taxes for them, or as an extra something that was perhaps
thrown in along with another property that you bought from them.
Thomas, who is one of our Commercial Mentoring Program students, was
doing a small land development project. He had found a piece of land that
was an “infill” project in the town that he lived in. Instead of buying the prop-
erty outright, he arranged to control the property using options.
Thomas found a friend of his who had a self-directed IRA and was willing to
provide the money the seller wanted in exchange for giving Thomas an
option to buy based on the current value of the land. This purchase price for
the property was close to $500,000. But instead of coming up with a down
173Chapter 9: Getting Creative with Financing
payment and having to make mortgage payments, Thomas set up a series of
option payments over time. The first payment of $5,000 was due after his 90
day free look period. This bought him another 60 days to work on getting the
approval to build on the property. Every 60 days from that point forward
Thomas owed another payment. He was able to negotiate so that each option
payment went toward his purchase price.
By the time Thomas got the final approval to build on the property, the total
amount invested from his friend’s IRA was just $80,000. He was able to pro-
vide a high rate of return to his friend. This was way more than he would
have made with his money sitting in a traditional IRA account. With the
approvals in place to build, the value of this land had jumped up to almost $1
million. After all of his costs, Thomas will clear several hundred thousand
dollars on this one deal. Are you starting to see the power of using options?
Leveraging the Equity in Your Portfolio
Another creative financing technique that you can use is to tap into the exist-
ing equity that you have in commercial or residential properties that are
already in your portfolio.
Employing blanket mortgages
One of the very first “no money down” deals that coauthor Peter Conti did
was put together with a blanket mortgage. The owner of the property ran a
small construction company, and he simply wanted to get rid of the apart-
ment building he owned. All Peter had to do was come in and assume the
existing mortgage and take over the payments. Now understand that at this
point, Peter was no Donald Trump. He didn’t have a huge track record or lots
of money in the bank to convince a lender that it was okay for him to go
ahead and assume alone.
However, Peter did have some other properties he owned. He was able to put
these up as additional security to convince a lender to go ahead and allow
him to assume the loan. The key in using blanket mortgages is knowing when
it’s absolutely necessary. You never want to cross-collateralize properties
unless you need to.
One of our Commercial Mentoring Program students named Mike came across
a small classified ad for a 20 unit apartment building. After calling the owner
and getting the details Mike ran through a quick analysis of the property. He
could see where even if he ended up paying the price the seller was asking
the building would make money from day one. Mike sat down with the owner
and got to know him while creating a good connection. Mike found out that
174 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
the seller was upset because all the other investors were contacting him with
low offers. The seller had worked hard for many years to build up his prop-
erty and was disturbed by all the people who wanted to beat him down on
his price. Mike decided to offer a blanket mortgage to get the seller to carry
back 100 percent of the financing for his purchase. At this point, Mike has
over $600,000 of equity in this property that he bought without using any of
his own money.
Be careful when you’re dealing with blanket mortgages, because you really
are pledging your equity and those other properties. If something should
happen on the property that you purchased using a blanket mortgage, the
seller or other lender will be able to foreclose not just on the property that
you purchased, but on the other properties as well.
Drawing on 401(k)s or IRAs
One of the best sources of secondary financing is money from other people’s
IRAs. This concept may seem strange, but stick with us on this one. In order
to provide loans for you to buy real estate, the only thing a person needs to
do is move her IRA from a traditional account to something known as a self-
directed IRA account. The only difference is that with a traditional account, the
institution decides how to invest your money — usually in stocks or bonds.
With a self-directed IRA, your new friend can decide where that money is
going to be invested. To get started with this technique, ask everyone you
know this question: “Do you know of anyone who would like to make higher
rates of return on their retirement funds?”
When someone answers that she would, simply give her an application to
transfer her funds to a self-directed IRA company. Then keep in touch with
her to let her know about potential investment opportunities. Typically, with
funds from an IRA, you want to make sure that they’re secured with a mort-
gage against the property. Companies that allow you to self direct an IRA are
listed at www.realstateinvestinglinks.com.
175Chapter 9: Getting Creative with Financing
176 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
Chapter 10
Raising Capital and
Forming Partnerships
In This Chapter
 Raising capital to fund your investments
 Creating a circle of potential investors for your next deal
 Putting together effective partnerships
For most people, if they’re going to do big deals, they need to raise the
funds to make it happen. In this chapter, we explain how to fund your
deals without using your own capital. Our favorite method of raising the
money needed to fund a deal involves finding other investors who can pro-
vide the private funds that you need. When funding a deal with private funds,
you need to have the following:
 A great deal that you’re excited about and that is under contract
 A Rolodex full of people who know you and your character
 A system that allows you to get the word out about your pending deal
The good news: After you master raising the money that you need to fund
your deals, you’ll be unstoppable! The bad news: Getting to this point doesn’t
happen overnight. You need to get good at meeting people and finding a way
to stay connected with them. Everything you need is right here in this
chapter.
Identifying the Keys to
Raising Private Funds
The first key to raising private funds to support your real estate deal is simple:
You must believe with all your heart and soul that this is a great deal. In
fact, you must believe so strongly in your deal that you would put your
parents’ retirement funds into the deal. You should also be willing to put your
own funds into the deal (if you have them). After all, when you’re getting
started, putting your own money on the line is a good way to prove to your
investors that you’re willing to put your money where your mouth is. This is
exactly what we did when we started raising the capital.
When funding a deal with some personal funds along with funds raised from
private parties, many commercial investors choose to arrange the deal so
that the private funds are paid back first — before they themselves get any of
their money back. This preferential repayment helps your deal funders know
that in order to get your money back out, you have to make sure the deal
works for them, too.
If you try to convince someone who doesn’t know you that you have a great
deal, you may succeed in getting him to accept that the deal is good. But that
brings us to the second key to raising private funds: Unless the investors
you’re approaching are comfortable with who you are as a person, the
chances of getting funding from him or her are slim to none (even if the deal
is a winner).
If you take the time to get to know that person and earn his trust, you’ll find
that most investors will also want to know about the deal — but the real
reason they’re willing to fund the deal is because they believe in you.
Building Your Rolodex
of Potential Investors
People who will invest in your deals are going to do so because they know
you and trust you. So how do you get to know more people beyond just your
immediate circle of friends?
Start by finding a way to keep in touch with the people in your Rolodex over
time. If all you ever do is add a name, phone number, and address to your
Rolodex, and you don’t find a way to create a relationship, the person proba-
bly won’t even remember meeting you.
Set a goal for the number of potential investors you want to add to your
Rolodex every month. Instead of simply focusing on the people who you
think have money, open up to the idea that everyone is a potential private
deal funder for you. When you’re talking to someone at the store, the library,
the gym, the beauty shop, or at your church, use this script:
Right now I’m looking at investing in a big _____ [office building, land devel-
opment, whatever you may be looking at that particular week]. It’s a _____-
square-foot project in _____ [the name of the state, city, or area). This one is
178 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
probably already funded, but if I come across something in the future that
would create a healthy rate of return for the investors I work with, would you
want me to at least let you know about it?
The next step is simple. Make sure you get the person’s name, address, phone
number, and e-mail address. Then make sure that you develop an easy way to
stay in touch with the potential investors on your list. Because people need
to get to know you and trust you before they feel comfortable funding your
projects, you want to create as many touch points, or chances for them to get
to know you, as possible.
Raising money from private parties involves some strict guidelines. If you do
it wrong, you can easily get into hot water by violating the securities laws.
One of the special training sessions we did with our mentoring students was
called “Funding Deals without Violating the Law.” To see a Web video of this
training session, go to www.commercialquickstart.com. We recommend
that you speak with a real estate attorney before you raise one penny. Have
that person explain to you what you can and can’t say or do in capital raising.
The laws are not only strict, but they’re also very complex.
Creating relationships with
potential investors
Do you want your Rolodex full of investors who are eager to fund your deals?
Well then, you’re going to have to put in the effort to create a relationship
with these folks first. It takes time, but if you do it in a systematic fashion, it’ll
get easier over time.
Looking to your existing relationships
Among your best resources are the people you already know. You may be a bit
uncomfortable getting out there and letting them know that you’re going after
investing in commercial real estate. But the biggest mistake that many new
investors make is failing to tap into the group of people they already know.
If you need help approaching people you know, you can use this script:
As you may have heard, I’m moving into investing in commercial real
estate — things like apartments, office buildings, and maybe even some
land development. Because it can be challenging at times, I’d like to ask
you for some emotional support if that’s okay with you.
If I’m working on a big deal like a $5 million property and I need a little
encouragement, is it okay if I call you from time to time?
See how easy it is to start the process?
179Chapter 10: Raising Capital and Forming Partnerships
People like to help other people. Many of your friends will be willing to sup-
port you. If you’re feeling confident, take it to the next step by saying:
Thanks for your support. So if I came across something in the future that
would create a healthy rate of return for the investors that I work with,
would you want me to at least let you know about it?
Make sure that no matter who you’re using to fund your deal you get the
proper paperwork done by using your attorney. This rule doesn’t change if
you’re working with family or friends. Treat every investor the same, right
from the start — whether they’re family or not.
Make sure that your family members have the same expectations as you do
from the investment. You may need to spend some extra time with them to
make sure that they really understand what they’re getting into. Avoid the rel-
ative who says, “Oh skip the details — I trust you.” He may be thinking that
he can get his funds back out at a moment’s notice. If he needs that money in
six months because his kid has to go to college, well, don’t spend the kid’s
college fund on your deals. Let this be surplus money that your relative
won’t be upset about if he loses it.
Don’t rule anyone out as a potential investor. Sam Walton, the founder of Wal-
Mart, was one of the wealthiest people around, but he drove a pickup truck
and appeared to be a “normal” person. If you don’t tell someone about the
investing opportunities that you run across, you’re doing a big disservice to
him and his family.
180 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
Funding from an unexpected source
Emanuel is a Commercial Mentoring student
who has been a chiropractor for the past 12
years. He needed to create $10,000 per month
or more in income to retire. Like most of our stu-
dents, Emanuel was in a hurry to change his life.
He decided to focus only on big deals right from
the start, knowing that he would have to raise
funding once he found the right property. It
took him ten months to finally get a winning
deal under contract. He purchased a 300-unit
apartment for $17,000 per unit for a total of
$5.1 million.
The funding ended up coming from someone
close to Emanuel. He was visiting his in-laws on
the way to inspect the property and happened
to mention it. To Emanuel’s surprise, it turns out
they had several million dollars that was just sit-
ting there earning 2 or 3 percent interest. When
the property sold in 12 months for $30,000 per
unit, it will provide a great return for Emanuel’s
relatives and pay off a cool $1 million to
Emanuel. The lesson is that you never know
who may end up funding your next commercial
deal.
Knowing where to meet potential investors
When you’re trying to beef up that Rolodex, you have to search out people
and groups in many different places — not just at work. Here are a few indi-
viduals and groups that you can tap into to begin building your relationships
and adding names in your Rolodex:
 Folks you do business with: You probably work with real estate brokers
and lenders on a daily basis. And most of them are so busy that they
don’t invest themselves. So, convince them that they can increase their
credibility with their clients if they were to invest in the same type of
property they’re selling. And of course, they’d be investing with you.
 People you work with: You may be friends with your co-workers. If so,
make sure that they know what you’re doing if you want them to be
potential investors for your next project.
 Church or other spiritual groups: If you have friends at your place of
worship, make sure those folks know that you invest in commercial real
estate. You want them to know what you’re doing so that they’re more
likely to be potential investors for your next deal.
 Athletic events and clubs: We love to bicycle. And what a great conver-
sation piece it makes to talk about what you’re doing during a ride with
your buddies. After your ride (or whatever activity you choose), exchange
contact information. This works with all sorts of activities, from sports
to hobbies.
 Mastermind groups: These groups are focus groups, usually business
related, that are terrific ways to promote your efforts to serious and
like-minded people.
 Networking groups: These groups can help you and the other members
to refer leads to one another. For instance, we once belonged to a local
networking club, called BNI (www.bni.com), that met once per week for
breakfast. Everyone got a chance to share what they did and the whole
purpose was to refer business leads to one another.
 Real estate investor associations: A great place to start “real estate club-
bing” would be with the National Real Estate Investor Association
(NREAI). This group has established club meetings year-round and
nationwide. Check out www.nationalreia.com for a club near you.
If you’re talking to someone from one of the previous groups (or just an indi-
vidual you know), you may want to use a script like this:
With the great weather, I’ve been having a blast with _____ [something you
love to do] lately. It’s been crazy, because I’m also looking at a couple of big
commercial real estate deals right now, a good-sized apartment building, and
an office building that’s downtown. The rates of return are amazing. Say, if I
came across something in the future that would create a healthy rate of
return for the investors I work with, would you want me to tell you about it?
181Chapter 10: Raising Capital and Forming Partnerships
Now that you have the person’s name, address, phone number, and e-mail
address, it’s time to kick your connection campaign in gear. Find ways to
spend time with the people in your network. Taking them out to dinner, play-
ing golf or tennis, or simply hanging out with each other’s families can be a
great way to really get to know someone and allow her to get comfortable
with you.
Using executive summaries
to nab potential investors
After you’ve built some trust with the folks in your Rolodex as prospective
private investors for your deal, you need to create a plan to get them inter-
ested in your deals. And after they’re interested, you need a way to get them
to step up and write you a check. This is where most investors fall down.
If you don’t have the ability to get the check, your deal won’t be funded and
you’ll be in tears.
Remember during your job search when you had a résumé and cover letter?
The cover letter’s purpose was to capture your future employer’s attention in
the first few sentences. If it caught his attention, he read your résumé. If not,
it went straight into the circular file (also known as the trash can). Well, when
we’re putting together written information to prospective investors, our cover
letter is referred to as an executive summary. It’s a short one-half to one-page
document that is a compelling and condensed version of your investment
opportunity.
Your executive summary is going to be competing to get the attention of the
busy people you have in your Rolodex. This means you need to be short,
sweet, and to the point.
Here’s an example of an executive summary sent out via e-mail:
Subject: You’ll Kick Yourself if You Miss This
Hey Brett,
You are about the busiest person I know — and the rates of return on this
deal are going to make you stop and salivate. . . .
The Property: 80,000-square-foot strip shopping center in El Paso, Texas
Rents are 75 percent of market in an area that is booming, and 30,000
more troops are on the way!
Under contract for $4.2 million — worth $5.1 million or more after raising
rents
Opportunity: Invest $270,000 and get a great base rate plus equity
sweetener!
182 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
Next steps: E-mail, call, or wagon-train it right now ’cause we’re looking to
work with just one investor on this one. Call or e-mail ASAP for details —
303-233-2233.
You probably know that I’ve sent this out to a number of other VIPs just
like you. . . .
Don’t wait. . . . First come, first served on this, baby.
Yours for Passive Income,
Peter Harris
This quick executive summary is followed up with a longer document with all
the details. The trick is in getting someone to slow down long enough to real-
ize what a great deal you have.
Connecting with your investors
When you’ve started growing your Rolodex or database of potential investors,
you need to stay in touch with them, keep them excited about the possibility
of investing, and maintain the accuracy of your database. We have discov-
ered that a great way to do this is by giving away helpful information to our
prospective investors. It’s free for them, and each time they say “Yes, please
send it to me,” we’re getting their latest e-mail address and adding it to our
database.
The secret is in the title of the information you provide. Think of the special
reports that you offer as if they were books in a bookstore. You can write the
most incredible book in the world, but if it doesn’t catch the browsers’ atten-
tion and make them want it, using just the words of the title, then no one is
going to buy your book. And that means no one is going to read it.
Here are some of the titles we’ve used over the years:
 “How to Create Multiple Streams of Income Buying Homes in Nice Areas
with Nothing Down”
 “Making Big Money Investing in Real Estate without Tenants, Banks, or
Rehab Projects”
 “Making Big Money Investing in Foreclosures without Cash or Credit”
Compare these to some of the losing titles that we didn’t use:
 “Nothing But Money”
 “Big Changes with Commercial Real Estate”
 “How to Find, Buy, and Manage Shopping Centers”
183Chapter 10: Raising Capital and Forming Partnerships
To find out whether your titles are winners or losers, you need to get feed-
back from the people who really count. The way to do this is to create three
slightly different special reports along with the three titles that you want to
test out. Then you can send an e-mail out to your database offering “Your
choice of any one of these three reports.” Track which report is the most
requested to determine which of your titles is the strongest.
The special reports that we offer to our prospective investors all have pretty
hot titles. Check them out:
 “How to Use the Velocity of Money to Retire Fast”
 “The Five Warning Signs of Bad Commercial Deals”
 “The Ten-Minute-a-Day Guide to Making Millions in Commercial
Properties”
 “How to Get Healthy Rates of Return by Investing in Commercial Real
Estate”
 “How to Retire Fast Investing in Commercial Real Estate”
We send an e-mail to our prospective investors that gives them a choice of
any two of the previous reports. It’s all automated, so our investors get a
response within minutes, which means that we’ve created another touch
point. If you’d like to look at our reports to use as models for your own, or if
you simply want to see how this part of our investing system works, send an
e-mail to investorreports@mentorfinancialgroup.com with the word
“Reports” in the subject line.
Deciding Whether to Go It Alone
or Use a Partner or Two
If you can do it by yourself, by all means go for it. However, we’ve found that
with most really big deals in the range of $5 million or more, having a team
helps to keep you motivated and also makes sure that everything gets done
on time.
One of the things we do in our commercial training is to have everyone com-
plete their profile/test at www.kolbe.com. It helps you understand what
you’re really good at, and what you’re better off letting someone else take
care of. It also shows what you or your partner’s tendencies are under stress.
The Commercial Mentoring students who have done this have really begun to
get to know each other and some of them have partnered up into teams
where three or four of them are working on one deal together. They’ve found
that this is a way they can do the things they love to do while leaving the
other pieces available for someone else who loves to do their part.
184 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
When you’re picking someone to partner with, remember these two critical
keys to long-term partnerships:
 Character means more than anything else. The best agreement in the
world can’t fix someone who doesn’t have the integrity that you’re
looking for.
 Someone who’s just like you doesn’t add anything to the mix. While
it’s fun to hang out with others who process the world just like you do,
you’re going to want to find people who are different from you. For
example, if you’re a big-picture person, you’re going to need someone
who’s great at details.
Here’s an example of one of the teams that has been put together in our com-
mercial program. The following students, who are all different, make up this
group:
 Emila: She’s a great project manager. She can break things down into
steps and follow through.
 Calli: She’s able to make anything happen. For her, the bigger, the better.
 Rodriguez: He has money and wisdom from his experience.
 Bob: He’s great at coming up with the vision and the really big ideas.
 Stan: He’s all about details and numbers, and he loves to play with
spreadsheets.
Creating the Right Teams
and Partnerships
When Eric and Sara first got started, it was just the two of them. Eric was
unclogging toilets and doing maintenance, and Sara was doing the books.
They were filling the buildings and their cash flow was increasing. Then we
challenged Eric to start growing their business. He suggested bringing a
bookkeeper in and getting maintenance people on staff, because Eric doesn’t
make much money doing maintenance.
The value of the right type of partnership is that each person brings a very
unique skill set. For instance, Eric isn’t the type of person who wants to sit
down and create an Excel spreadsheet that shows whether the project is
going to be profitable. But Sara loves doing that. Eric and Sara have a partner
on their team who actually loves getting in his car and driving for two weeks
across the state looking for deals. He enjoys talking to agents and driving to
small towns and looking for 20-unit apartment buildings or strip centers.
They have another person on their team who’s excellent at marketing.
185Chapter 10: Raising Capital and Forming Partnerships
The value of the team is in finding people who are passionate about an area
of the business that you understand is important but you don’t naturally
gravitate toward yourself.
Structuring your partnership
If you’re raising more than a few thousand dollars and you’re anticipating
working with multiple investors, you’ll probably want to form something
called a private placement memorandum (PPM). This is just a fancy phrase
that means “Large pile of paper that costs a good chunk of lawyer’s fees so
that you don’t violate any securities laws.” Here are a couple of tips if you’re
considering a PPM:
 Find another investor who’s already formed a PPM and ask him who he
has used. Doing so could save you thousands of dollars.
 Don’t get intimidated by the paperwork. If you have the right team
behind you, you can do anything!
For a smaller deal, you’ll probably want to create a simple limited liability
company. Make sure that your operating agreement spells out everything
that can happen both in good times and bad. For example, make sure you
have a buyout clause in case you decide at some point to part ways. Either
way, we suggest having a real estate attorney draw up any of the agreements
needed.
Knowing how much to pay your investors
If you want to know how much to pay your investors, here’s the correct
answer: “As much as it takes to get the deal done.” You want to keep enough
to make it worth your while, though. The good news with commercial deals
is that there’s usually enough profit to go around.
Typically, you would offer your investors a double-digit return. A 10 percent
return on their investment is a good starting point. In some cases, you could
offer the investors a fixed return plus part of the profits when you sell or
refinance.
One of our Commercial Mentoring clients named Rob wanted to create enough
passive income so that both he and his wife could retire from the police force.
Because they felt that they needed a track record, they bought a large apart-
ment complex and gave almost all the profits to their investors! Before you
feel bad for them, understand that it was a nothing-down deal for them and
that now they have the experience to offer a much smaller piece of the pie
to their investors than they did when they were first starting out.
186 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
Writing up the agreements
to use with your investors
Writing up agreements is simple. Make sure that you consult your own legal
counsel, however. You want to explore using a private placement memoran-
dum, a limited liability company, or perhaps a partnership agreement. Take
the time to stay involved so that you get something that you understand
and that meets your needs.
How much does it cost to raise funds and do all the paperwork? Actually, the
way our Commercial Mentoring Program clients do it, nothing. After you have
the property under contract, you can start looking for investors. Several of
our students have offered a crazy rate of return for an investor who offers the
upfront money needed to create the other funding documents. This investor
knows that if the deal doesn’t fly for some reason, the investment is worth-
less. You’d be surprised how many people are willing to roll the dice on your
behalf. Just make sure you let them know what they’re getting into and put it
in writing.
Considering how long you want
to partner with someone
Take the time to find out what your partner’s intent is. Some people may want
to partner for ten years; others may only want to partner for a year or two as
they get started. One of the reasons that our Commercial Mentoring Program
has taken off is that we split the profits, with 75 percent going to the student
and the other 25 percent going to our company. We commit to doing this
together and agree that we’ll all continue to work together until the student
makes at least $300,000. Some people don’t like this level of intense support,
but we’ve found that it separates the wannabes from those who are willing to
do whatever it takes.
Interviewing a potential partner
Choosing the right partners starts with asking the right questions. It’s impor-
tant that you interview your potential partners so that you can get to know
that person and how they do business. And you need to be the very best lis-
tener possible during the interview because other questions will evolve from
her one answer. It’s okay to keep asking deeper and deeper questions. After
all, this person could possibly be working with you every single day for years
whether you like it or not.
187Chapter 10: Raising Capital and Forming Partnerships
Here are some important questions you should ask:
 What’s your ideal exit strategy for a project? What are you good at
on making profits in commercial real estate? Are you skilled at doing
rehab projects? Do you have a knack for buying and operating cash-
flowing properties?
 Are you looking for long-term growth or short-term cash flow? Are
you a “buy and hold” type of investor? If you are, how long do you typi-
cally hold a property and under what conditions would you consider
selling? If not, discuss some of your short-term goals.
 What are your other long-term goals? Describe your “big picture”
investment objectives.
 Do you have enough capital set aside to survive during a 24- to 36-
month project? How much cash or liquidity do you bring to the table? If
it takes us longer than expected to make a profit, will you be okay with
that?
 How much of a time commitment can you make to the team? Are you a
full-time investor or do you have a daytime job? How about family com-
mitments? Do you have time to travel, if needed?
Check the credit score of all potential partners before you admit them to
your group. Each person’s credit score affects the group as a whole when it
comes time to apply for loans.
188 Part III: Funding Your Deals: Financing and Lending
Part IV
Day-to-Day
Ownership and
Operations
In this part . . .
In this part, we show you how to keep tabs on your
important investments by revealing our simple
“manage the manger” process. In addition, we offer plenty
of advice on protecting your assets. The part ends with
something you won’t find in most investing books: the
reasons why some properties fail and how you can avoid
making the same mistakes.
Chapter 11
Property Management: Who’s
Minding Your Ship?
In This Chapter
 Being the boss of your commercial property
 Hiring a professional property management company
 Putting your best foot forward as an absentee owner
Commercial properties are similar to cruise ships in some ways. If you
have a successful, well-informed captain steering the ship to your desti-
nation, you’ll get there and have lots of fun doing it. You may even relax a
little. However, if your captain takes you off course and into choppy waters,
you could get seasick and end up on a deserted island. Well, the same applies
to your commercial property investment: You have to make sure that your
“captain” is a good one or else your investment may receive a burial at sea.
In this chapter, you get down to the business of discovering the essential
skills of navigating and managing your property. We give you tips on how to
do it yourself and how to hire and manage a property manager. We give you
an inside look into the day-to-day responsibilities of a property manager. We
also help you discover the world of absentee owners. Knowing how to suc-
cessfully manage a property from afar is a critical navigational skill to pos-
sess. It allows you to put the pieces together in owning and operating a
commercial property successfully and profitably.
I’m the Boss: Managing Your
Commercial Property Yourself
You want to manage your own commercial properties do you? Well, here’s a
little secret about making nice profits, growing your real estate business, and
making smart investment decisions: It’s not about the property. That’s right,
being successful in managing your own property has little to do with the
property. So, if it isn’t about the property, who or what is it really about? The
answer is you! It’s about you, the investor; you, the property owner; and you,
the property manager. In the following sections, we give you all that you need
to know in order to successfully manage your real estate.
Your property’s success will never go beyond your own personal business
development. So, go forth and spend money and time educating yourself on
how to successfully manage a property and improve your overall business
skills. Your future depends on it!
Improving your management
skills with a few basic tips
We’ve already spent the time and money educating ourselves regarding all
things real estate, so we’re happy to provide you with some time-tested
advice. When managing the property yourself, keep the following general
tips in mind:
 Never be friends with your tenants. Instead, make sure your relation-
ship is a business-friendly one. The last thing you want to do is take
your friend to court for an eviction (which means that you probably
won’t and you’ll be the one to lose out).
 Know that people (not properties) cause problems. Properties don’t pay
late, cause damage, or cause high vacancy. People cause these problems.
So, make it a point to lease to good tenants and good companies. Having
no tenant is better than having a bad one, we say.
 Record everything in writing. As manager of any real estate, words
spoken are like sticks and stones — not worth very much. So make sure
that you write everything down, including rent increases, promises to pay,
renewals, or improvements or repairs that the tenant has agreed to do.
 Know your market like the back of your hand. Always know what your
competitors down the block are doing with their properties. Know what
they’re offering to their tenants, know what sells, and know what the
tenant-landlord laws are in your area. To find out how to best become
familiar with your market, check out Chapter 3.
 Have nothing in your name. Protect yourself and your personal assets
from lawsuits by having your properties and businesses legally detached
from you personally. First of all, the property should be in an LLC (a lim-
ited liability company) or in another type of legal entity that you and
your real estate attorney and tax advisor agree on. That way if a tenant
files a lawsuit, he can only go after what’s in the LLC or entity, not after
your home and personal belongings. Also, don’t commingle the finances
between the property and your personal expenses in any way because,
192 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
in most cases, that will negate the protection an LLC or entity provides
you. For more information on LLCs and other legal entities, see
Chapter 12.
The success and profitability of your commercial real estate investing busi-
ness also depends a lot on your management techniques and how you
implement them. Here are a few tips to help you get the ball rolling:
 Work on your people-handling skills. When managing commercial real
estate, you’re responsible for managing people of many different types:
your tenants, employees, contractors, vendors, government employees,
and the list goes on. The key to success is patience and tact (and it
doesn’t hurt to be nice either).
 Know your lease agreements inside and out before they’re signed by
either side. It’s often said that when you buy a commercial property,
you’re buying the lease and the building comes for free. In other words,
if your lease is legally “weak,” then your investment is financially weak
in the eyes of other investors, lenders, and appraisers.
 No matter how busy you get, write a business plan for the property.
Remember, commercial properties are businesses. Treating them that
way allows you to sleep at night because you know exactly what needs
to be done and when. A good and well-thought-out business plan has a
property summary, a market analysis, a sales and marketing plan, a man-
agement summary, and a financial plan.
 Know your strengths and weaknesses in managing the property. After
you assess your strengths and weaknesses, be sure to build on your
strengths. Take on those tasks that you do well and that give you joy.
Hire out those that you don’t do well or that you don’t like to do.
 Do it right the first time. Pay for good help. The lowest bid may not be
the best choice. Focus on quality, thoroughness, and attention to detail
in everything you do concerning the property. After all, it’s your prop-
erty (and it’s what pays the bills!).
Set a benchmark for your own personal cash flow. When you get right down
to it, you’re in this business to make money, right? After setting up a budget
that takes into account the income and expenses of the property, set an
amount that you’ll collect as a payment for yourself as the owner and opera-
tor. Treat that amount as you would any other expense on the property.
Developing basic business systems
When you’re about to purchase a commercial property remember that what
you’re really about to own is a full-blown business. You’re making a huge
financial commitment, no matter how much of a down payment you make.
193Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship?
Just as with any other business, you have customers — the tenants that you
lease to — and you have inventory — the spaces or apartments that you’re
renting. There’s also a sizable exchange of money between you and the ten-
ants. Having said that, remember that every well-operated business develops
basic systems to help it run efficiently. Commercial properties are no different.
For instance, you need to develop the following basic business systems in
order to successfully manage your own property:
 An accounting system: This type of system will help you handle the
cash flowing in and the cash flowing out.
Because the lifeblood of a business is cash, you always need to be con-
scientious of your accounts. Take every measure to ensure that all the
cash is accounted for every day — not just once per month.
 A sales and marketing system: Whether you know it or not, you’re a
sales person when managing your own property. You’re selling units of
space, apartments, or entire floors to a customer, your tenant. So smile
and close that sale. Your sales and marketing system may include vari-
ous means of advertising, ways of tracking the effectiveness of your
advertising, training of staff to show prospective tenants the property,
and market studies about competition.
 An operations system: When managing your own property, you have to
keep track of all the legal requirements of operating a property, such as
enforcement of leases, building codes, local ordinances, building secu-
rity, and hiring and managing contractors and vendors. And don’t forget
to track lease renewals.
 A maintenance system: Let’s say that a tenant notices water streaming
down into her workspace. Do you simply get her a cup or bucket? No, of
course not. You need to have a system for tenants to report such things,
and then you fix them quickly. Also, you need to implement a preventive
maintenance plan for every moving part on your property, such as air
conditioners, furnaces, fans, elevators, escalators, and whatever else
has moving parts.
A do-it-yourselfer’s checklist
Especially when first starting out in managing your own property, you may
end up doing everything yourself (if you want to). You’ll take care of advertis-
ing, showings, leasing, credit checks, some of the maintenance, hiring help,
keeping the books, and the rehab, if required. Look at it as a way to learn the
business from the inside out, earning your stripes, while at the same time cut-
ting costs by doing those things yourself. If you’re going it alone, all the many
details can be pretty overwhelming. But if you follow our lead, you’ll be just
fine. Here are a few helpful questions to sort through as you get started:
194 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
 Is the commercial space ready to be leased? Is it clean and presentable,
does it meet building codes, and is it approved for its intended use?
 Who are you intending to lease to? Decide who your ideal tenants
would be and market to them specifically. Focus on your target market.
Don’t try to be a “be-all” to everyone because it’s impossible to make
everyone happy.
 How much are you leasing the unit or space for? Pick up the phone
and do a market survey and find out what your competitor down the
street is charging for its similar space. Commercial spaces that are kept
full are priced just right.
 Do you have a solid lease agreement? Make sure your lease agreement
is from a reputable source and is lawyer approved. We often hear in this
line of work that “Your property is only worth the strength of the lease.”
So, if this lease is your first ever, definitely get some help from a local
real estate attorney. Remember: There’s no such thing as a standard
lease agreement. Office building, retail center, and apartment leases are
way different from each other.
 Do you have the means to do a background and credit check on the
prospective tenant? Again, whether you’re leasing to a person or com-
pany, both need to be creditworthy and qualified with solid financial
strength. In order to perform credit and background checks on individu-
als, there are many online sources available. They charge a fee each
time, but these costs are passed on to the applicant. In order to have a
quick check of a business’s credit, obtain a Dunn and Bradstreet report
from www.dnb.com.
 Is your support team in place? Your support team, which includes a
contractor, an electrician, a plumber, a janitor, a landscaper, a book-
keeper, and an attorney, needs to be on hand at all times in case you
need them. And, believe us, you will need them.
 What’s your CPA’s name? That’s right, you need a CPA and you need to
know his name. You need a CPA to do your tax planning and tax strategy.
Come on, you can’t do everything yourself.
Training your tenants to respect
you and the property
When you think about it, tenants are sort of like kids (but please don’t tell
them we said so). For instance, if you raise and train kids properly, they’ll
behave most times. When they misbehave, however, you have to show them
who’s boss or else your house will be a mess. The same theory applies for
your tenants: If you don’t train them consistently and according to the rules
you’ve established, your property will be a mess. Guaranteed.
195Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship?
Training tenants and expecting them to conform goes both ways. Don’t expect
the tenants to pick up trash if your maintenance staff doesn’t do this well.
Also, don’t expect them to pay on time 100 percent of the time if you allow
them to sometimes pay late without being penalized.
The following list provides some training ideas for your tenants. However,
due to the different natures of tenants in each property type, you’ll have to
make them fit into your own plan of management. Here are some of the things
you can do to run a tidy and successful ship:
 Allow peaceful enjoyment of the premises. Allowing loud noises, loud
parties, and rowdy gatherings is a surefire way for things to get out of
hand in a jiffy. Put yourself in the shoes of a tenant who just wants to
come to work (or come home) and get things done, but he’s disturbed
by loud noises down the hall every day. Is he going to renew his lease
when it’s up for renewal? We doubt it. To avoid an exodus of tenants,
give everyone a strict guideline on what noises aren’t permitted, when
certain noises can take place, and where those noises can take place.
 Implement a system to report maintenance issues. To avoid cranky ten-
ants, make sure that everyone is well informed on how to report any
maintenance or repair issue with their particular unit or with any safety
issues they notice on the property. Give the tenants a very simple and
convenient method of reporting such things. For instance, we have all of
our tenants call a central number to report a maintenance issue. In addi-
tion, we have an emergency service available 24/7 for late at night, week-
ends, and holidays.
 Conduct routine physical inspections. As a preventive measure that’s
sure to create happy tenants, perform routine physical inspections of
the units or space on a regular basis such as every 6 to 12 months. This
gives you the opportunity to see if any property abuses are occurring. If
there are, you can address them right away with the tenant. The proper
way to make these inspections is to give the tenants advance notice that
you’ll be conducting an inspection of their units or space on a certain
day and time.
 Provide a feeling of order within the property. Believe it or not, no
matter how free spirited tenants may think they are, they all desire order
and consistency in their place of stay or business. To create a feeling
of order, make sure signs are well cared for and clean. Make sure any
posted notices are in good shape and are up-to-date. Make sure gates are
closed when and where they should be. Make sure the landscape is regu-
larly maintained. Even make sure that your company stationery is pro-
fessional and consistent. There’s nothing like professionalism to set
the tone.
 Present written tenant policies and procedures. Providing a list of poli-
cies and procedures is important because it provides a road map as to
how you will operate the property. We have each tenant read, acknowl-
edge, and sign our policy and procedures form as part of their lease
196 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
package. In this form, we include our operational policies and procedures
on how we expect tenants to perform their part of the lease agreement.
For instance, we include expectations regarding payment, parking, envi-
ronmental disturbances, maintenance, pets (if allowed), and so on.
 Don’t accept late payments. Cash-flow problems start with tenants not
paying on time. Properties with a lot of delinquent payments and out-
standing balances usually fell into that trap by allowing only one tenant
to pay late. Then the word spread like wildfire to the rest of the tenants
because your “iron fist” wasn’t laid down. Properties with a history of
late payments are absolutely a property management problem. As we’ve
mentioned before, cash is the lifeblood of your operation, and so the life
of your property will be drastically affected if you don’t take ownership of
the cash owed to you by the tenants.
Your tenants’ profiles will reflect the way you run your property. If you have a
run-down property, you’ll attract run-down tenants. On the other hand, if you
own a property that shows pride of ownership, you’ll attract tenants that are
in tiptop shape themselves.
Operating successfully day-to-day
with the proper people and tools
Managing your own property requires you to have certain things right within
your reach. So, what tools do you need to get the job done as a property
manager? What skilled people do you need to hire? What type of data or
research do you always need to have on hand? Here’s a list of things you
need to have or know to manage your property:
 Property management software: A couple of years into his real estate
investing career, coauthor Peter Harris found himself pushing the enve-
lope in keeping track of all the properties he owned. Soon, he was forced
to start using property management software that allowed him to keep
track of tenant information, tenant payments, vacancies, delinquencies,
lease rates and renewals, maintenance records, and vendor information.
This type of software is a wise investment and will likely enable you to
expand your business. Some of the popular software packages are avail-
able from Yardi Systems, Rent Manager, Intuit, and Rent-Right, just to
name a few.
 Advertising: You must have a means of advertising your property’s
vacant spaces or units. To do so, use one or more of the many methods
available:
• The tried and true “For Rent” or “For Lease” signs are amazingly
effective and inexpensive. Banners and lawn signs are also popular.
197Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship?
• Referrals by tenants are quite helpful. They’re cheap — the only
money you have to pay is the amount that you offer a tenant for
a referral. Also, it’s always a compliment to your property when a
tenant feels obliged to recruit for you.
• Online Internet advertising is probably the most-used method of
getting the word out these days. You can sign up with numerous
Web sites, some of which are free; others require you to pay a fee
to use their services.
• The most-expensive, but not necessarily the most-effective
method, in our opinion, is running an ad in the local newspaper.
• You can hire someone to do the advertising for you. We suggest
hiring a leasing specialist, a person who specializes in finding ten-
ants for your property.
 Accounting software: There’s a wide range of accounting software pro-
grams that you can use to keep track of your property’s finances, includ-
ing Quickbooks by Intuit. When coauthor Peter Harris first started, he
managed his property’s finances with the spreadsheet software that
came with his computer. He soon outgrew it and upgraded to a more
professional program. It was worth its weight in gold. You can take this
task to the next level by combining your accounting software with prop-
erty management software.
 Vendors: If you’re like us, any repair that requires more than a hammer
and a screwdriver, you hire it out. You’re going to need to contract with
skilled people to do such things as electrical, plumbing, carpentry, land-
scaping, or anything that you’re unable to do yourself due to your lack
of skill or time. The best way to find these types of vendors is by word of
mouth. Ask for a referral from a fellow investor or from one of your other
vendors. Always check references and ask to see a sample of their work,
if available.
 On-site maintenance: Handymen are invaluable in the commercial real
estate business. These are the guys that are the operation behind the
operation. We use them to do routine and preventive maintenance and
small repairs around or on the property. In the apartment business, we
figure we’ll need one maintenance person for every 50 apartment units.
For shopping centers and offices, property needs vary too greatly to
estimate.
 A maintenance reporting system: If a window is broken in an entryway,
who tells who to fix it? How does the new window get purchased? Who
makes sure it’s fixed quickly? How does the property manager know
when the work is done? All these questions are answered when you have
an internal system of maintenance reporting. When a tenant reports a
problem, it needs to be taken care of swiftly, cost-effectively, and cor-
rectly, and the boss must be notified when it’s done. Maintenance
should focus on curb appeal, daily and routine maintenance, and last,
capital improvements.
198 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
 An attorney: Evictions and tenant disputes are bound to occur at some
time. It’s just part of the business we’re in. Unless you stay up-to-date
and familiar with the local laws involving tenant-landlord matters, we
suggest hiring a real estate attorney to handle these types of things. You
can go ahead and handle some of the more routine evictions, but con-
sult a real estate attorney for the more complex matters. We say this
because forms and notices that are improperly drawn up can be thrown
out of court and can send you back to square one with the problem
tenant.
 A market survey: One sure way of increasing the value of your property
is to raise the rents or lease rates. In commercial real estate, we don’t
rely on appreciation. We focus on the bottom line: the net operating
income. So, one way of knowing if you can increase your rents is if your
property consistently stays 100 percent occupied. When your space is
constantly full, it usually means that your rates are low for the area.
How do you know for sure if your rents are low? The answer is to per-
form a rent- and lease-rate survey or a competitive analysis of neighbor-
ing properties. You do this by researching and asking those property
managers what their rates are. It’s that simple. Compare their rates to
yours. If your rates are lower than theirs and your property is 100 per-
cent occupied, this indicates that there’s room for you to increase your
rates to at least the competitor’s level. Another way of getting this
important information is to call a local real estate broker.
Letting Go: Using Professional Property
Management Companies
After several years of purchasing properties locally, coauthor Peter Harris
came across a time in his career where he had to make the decision to step
away from the captain’s seat to allow a professional property management
company to manage his properties. As his area matured in pricing and his
returns on investment started to decrease with each new purchase, he
decided to look outside of his area. As he analyzed deals outside of his
area, they looked quite attractive and he began to invest more there.
He had definitely begun reaping the benefits of higher returns, when some-
thing started to happen: Because he owned and operated more properties,
locally and out of the area, his whole business life became managing the
properties. He had virtually no time to search for, analyze, and invest in new
and exciting projects because nearly all of his time was spent on operating
the properties. It even began to weigh in on his personal and family life as
well. In essence, his management duties had taken over his life. And, luckily,
he knew there was more to life than just real estate.
199Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship?
So, he had to make a decision: Keep on trucking at a mile a minute or let go?
He decided to let go and hire professional property management companies
to oversee his properties. He soon got his life back. We don’t want you to get
sucked in like Peter did, so in this section, we discuss how to successfully
hire and manage property management companies.
Understanding the ins and outs of
professional property management
Professional property managers are a special breed. They have to be extremely
effective organizers, and they must be masters of the day planner. Frankly, we
don’t know how they can keep track of thousands of apartment units and mil-
lions of square feet of space at any one time. But the successful ones do this
quite well. And thankfully so. Here’s a typical list of the day-to-day responsi-
bilities of a professional property manager. She must do the following:
 Collect and deposit rents
 Oversee maintenance of the property
 Handle day-to-day operations
 Contract in the name of the owner for utilities
 Enforce leases
 Hire and supervise all employees and independent contractors
 Keep accounting books and records
 Pay all bills in a timely fashion
 Furnish the owner with financial reports
 Prepare and execute annual operating budget and capital expenditures
 Write a sales and marketing plan
 Monitor effectiveness of the sales and marketing plan
 Handle legal matters, such as evictions
 Handle emergencies
 Work with local officials, such as police and code enforcement
What the previous list does is help you define the role of the professional
property manager or property management company. It’s always helpful
to know what to expect out of a person or company that you hire. Be clear
and concise upfront and have everything in writing before signing on the
dotted line.
200 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
Deciding to hire a professional property
management company
Think of your million-dollar investment as a suitcase full of money. Now imag-
ine that due to your busy schedule, you need to find someone to look after
your suitcase when you can’t be around. You can imagine how scrutinizing
you would be of the person or company you chose to guard your suitcase full
of money. You’d check that person’s or company’s background, credibility
and capability, and integrity to the utmost with tough questions.
So, what we’re trying to say is this: Treat hiring and managing of a property
management company for your property with the same care. After all, your
investment is worth a lot of money!
Determining whether you want to hire a property management company to
look after your investment can be a difficult and frustrating decision. However,
there are some instances where you’re almost sure to hire someone. Here
are those four instances:
 The property isn’t local or it’s too far away. For instance, performing
the following duties can be difficult if you’re operating properties that
aren’t in your area:
• Picking up and depositing rents
• Overseeing maintenance and repairs
• Taking care of evictions
• Handling emergencies
 The property is too large. Here are two questions to ask yourself if you
aren’t sure whether your property is too large:
• How will I manage 100 apartment units myself and still have a day-
time job?
• Can my current self-managed apartment business handle double or
triple the amount of units efficiently?
 You want to have a life or get your life back. Let’s face it, managing
property profitably takes time — your time. How is your time best used?
Are you spending too much time on your apartments and not enough
on the other parts of your life? If so, hiring a property management
company may be the right decision for you.
 You aren’t good at managing property. You know you’re leaving money
on the table each month due to your lack of skills. If that’s the case, hire
someone who has these skills and has a system and passion for manag-
ing property. This way, you get to do what you do (and enjoy!) best.
201Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship?
Searching for property management
candidates
When you’re trying to round up property manager candidates, start by asking
for referrals. For instance, use commercial real estate brokers as a resource
for referrals. Hopefully, they have done enough deals where their clients are
using management companies that they can speak on their experiences. We
would also ask fellow investors who own properties like yours. Inquire about
their experiences with certain companies that you’re looking into. If one of
your referrals doesn’t pan out, ask that referral for a referral. Because prop-
erty management selection is such a hit-or-miss process, it’s best to start off
interviewing someone who has already used that particular management
company.
Here are some search-related tips to keep in mind:
 It’s helpful to drive around the neighborhood looking for “For Rent” or
“Now Leasing” signs. Most times, the phone numbers listed are from
property managers. Call those companies and start “feeling them out” as
possible interview candidates. We suggest just being honest and straight-
forward and telling them the reason for the call is to find property man-
agement for yourself.
 It’s best to gather a minimum of three property managers to interview.
Obviously, the more you interview, the better your chances are of hiring
the best suitor for the property.
 If you’re unable to find a reputable property management company,
don’t purchase the property — no matter how good of a deal it is.
Remember the suitcase of money?
Interviewing your prospective managers
Okay, so now it’s time to pick up the phone and start the initial interview
process. Remember, this is just a “feeling out” process, where you’re looking
for professionalism, prompt return of your phone call, and good rapport.
There’s no way you can judge the quality of the candidates’ management
skills just yet. In fact, we’ve found that you can go through all the interview
situations and assessments and still not have a full grasp on a candidate’s
skills. You don’t find out who your new manager really is until he’s hired and
put into action.
This interview isn’t for telling every candidate everything you expect. It’s
merely to gather information in order to make a decision regarding who you
want to conduct a full interview with.
202 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
Here are a few questions to ask during your initial phone calls:
 What is the general vacancy rate in your area? “Your area” could be a
city, town, neighborhood, district, or street. This information is crucial
when studying the feasibility of owning property in this area.
 How many units and/or square feet of space do you currently have under
management? What type? Make sure that the company has experience
with your type of property. After all, a property management company
that manages 400 single-family homes isn’t the same as one that man-
ages 400 units of apartment buildings.
 How long have you been in business? If a candidate has less than a year
of experience, don’t use him. A candidate really needs to complete at
least one cycle (spring, summer, fall, winter) to know what’s going on.
We personally wouldn’t use anyone with less than three years of actual
experience.
 What are your percentage management fees? Plug these fees into your
property cash-flow analysis. Compare fees and services with other
companies.
 Do you have your own maintenance staff or do you use independent
contractors?
 What is the cost for an eviction process from start to finish? Have the
candidates review with the whole process with you.
 What are the costs of new leases to the new owner?
 How do you advertise your vacancies? Who pays for advertising?
 What are your business hours?
 How are tenant emergencies and weekend calls handled?
 What monthly reports do you typically send owners?
After hanging up from a phone interview, it helps to sit back and ask yourself
this important question: “What does my gut feeling tell me about this person
and his company?” Gut feeling and instinct are an important part of this
process, so honor your perception. If you feel that there wasn’t a connection
between the two of you, move on to the next candidate. Whatever you do,
don’t continue with a candidate just because he was really nice. Nice doesn’t
cut it in property management.
Checking credibility and capability
After conducting your initial phone interviews, you have to narrow your
choices. To do so, ask those companies that you’re interested in whether
they’re interested in managing your property. If the answer is yes, the next
203Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship?
step is to invite them to the property for a face-to-face meeting and walk-
through. During this meeting, you have to gauge their credibility and capabil-
ity. Asking yourself the following three questions can help:
 Is this company a “Mom and Pop” operation? Smaller-sized operations
don’t have the manpower to get the job done. They’re just too small to
consistently deliver what they promise. You may want to steer clear,
because you’ll likely need to hire a medium-sized property management
company. Medium-sized companies have more structure, more employ-
ees, and have a “company feel” to them. On the other hand, hiring a very
large property management company that manages 5,000 units and mil-
lions of square feet may be a bit too expensive for you at this point.
 Does the company’s management style match yours? Is your prefer-
ence to work with a very aggressive “in your face” manager or one that’s
more diplomatic. Both styles can be effective in their own ways. Choose
a type that settles with what you’ve been exposed to in your own life. It’s
only natural to gravitate toward what you feel would be more effective.
 Is the company local? Find out if the company operates in the same city
as your property. If it doesn’t, how far away is it and does it currently
manage property in the vicinity? If the company is not local, and has no
presence, you’ll have to question how well they know the area, the
market, and potential tenants.
A big chunk of hiring an excellent property management company and being
successful is being in agreement with one another. What we mean is that you
need to make sure that you and the manager have a complete understanding
of each side’s expectations. So, be sure to express, in detail, as much about
your expectations as you can to the property manager. In general, and from
an owner’s point of view, here are your likely expectations plainly put:
 Maximize potential rental income and reduce operating costs
 Strengthen tenant retention and relations
 Enhance visual appeal of property and increase property value
These are ultimate goals for a property when you get right down to it.
Inquire whether any of the property management companies you’re consider-
ing hiring owns and manages properties they personally own. We consider
this a huge potential conflict of interest. The property they manage for you
may be in direct competition with yours. Whose property gets the best ten-
ants and whose property gets occupied first are two questions we would con-
stantly ponder.
204 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
Drafting the property management
agreement
After you’ve selected a property management company, you need to create a
legally binding agreement, called a property management agreement, between
the both of you. This agreement should describe the duties and responsibili-
ties of both the owner and the manager. Before you sign one of these agree-
ments, make sure that you have certain clauses in the contract. In our
experiences, property managers want to get away with as little as possible
on the agreement. The following are basic “must-have” clauses of a property
management agreement:
 Leasing clause: This clause says that the manager must use her best
efforts to keep the property rented and leased by procuring tenants for
the property and negotiating and executing on behalf of the owner.
 Rents clause: Under this clause, the manager is required to collect and
deposit the rents and any revenues from the property and serve all
notices for the collection of rent and other charges. The manager is also
required to initiate actions for evictions and when necessary, to settle,
compromise, or release actions or suits and reinstate tenancy.
 Service contracts clause: A service contract clause requires the man-
ager to execute in the owner’s name for utilities and services for the
operation and maintenance of the property.
 Accounting clause: This clause says that the manager must keep proper
books of account for the property and that these books need to be open
for inspection by the owner. Also, the property manager must give the
owner a monthly statement of financial status and operations on a speci-
fied date of each month.
 Owner approval dollar amount clause: This clause states that the prop-
erty management shall seek the written approval of the owner before
spending an amount of money that exceeds a previously established
amount.
 Reserve account clause: Under this clause, the owner must maintain a
specific amount of money in her account as a reserve amount. If the bal-
ance falls below this amount, the owner shall replenish it within 30 days.
 Compensation to property manager clause: Under this clause, the
owner agrees to pay the property manager on a monthly basis for the
services that the manager provides. Compensation can be a percentage
of collected revenues or a fixed fee. The percentage typically ranges
from 4 percent to 10 percent of collected income.
205Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship?
Before signing your contract, find out if there’s a per new lease fee. A per
new lease fee is a dollar amount charged to the owner every time a new
lease is signed. In some cases, this fee can be as much as one month’s
rent. Find out who keeps the late fees, and determine whether there’s an
extra charge at any time during the eviction process. Will the property
manager charge you every time they go to court? All these fees can
quickly add up and erase your cash flow.
 Obligations of owner clause: This clause states that the owner’s require-
ments include providing direction, specifications, and plans to the prop-
erty management, reimbursing the property management for expenses
occurred, and maintaining proper insurance levels.
 Terms of agreement clause: This clause obviously provides information
on the terms of the agreement. Initial terms are usually for 12 months.
Never sign on for more than 12 months at any time because the property
manager may not be a good fit for you after all. Either party may termi-
nate the agreement by giving a 30-day written notice to the other party.
 Default clause: This clause states that if either party fails to perform his
obligations per the agreement, the performing party may terminate the
agreement. Legal action on either side is discussed in this clause as well.
 Terminations clause: According to this clause, immediately upon termi-
nation, the property manager must provide the owner with all originals
or copies of leases and all agreements and related documents. All prop-
erty financial records in possession of the property manager must be
delivered to the owner. A 30-day notice is required for termination.
 Fiduciary responsibility/statutory of compliance clause: This is the
code of ethics clause. It states that the property manager will perform
all duties in the agreement. It also states the following:
• That the property manager’s main obligation is to obey and abide
by the law
• That the property manager will notify the owner of professional
opinion matters
• That the property manager shall keep the owner’s information
strictly confidential and shall not share it with the public
Be wary of fine print embedded in the agreement. For instance, if you ever
see a “hold harmless” clause, have it removed from the agreement. This type
of clause grants the property management company immunity from any harm
and liability it causes on your property whether it’s the company’s fault or
not. If it’s a professional company and you’re taking a risk on hiring them,
they must take some of the responsibility. That’s only fair, right? Also, be sure
to delete any clauses stating that the property manager will act as real estate
agent or broker or will receive commission if and when the owner sells the
property. Hire a real estate agent to market and sell your property and let
the property managers do what they do best, and that is, manage.
206 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
When working with property management companies on either capital
improvement projects (such as replacing a roof or repaving the parking lot)
or on rehabilitation projects, never pay for the whole project upfront and
never put all the money into an account that the property management has
access to. It’s human nature to spend, rather than save, when money is read-
ily available — especially if the money being used isn’t theirs. Instead, have
the money available on an “as-needed” or “draw” basis.
Getting your reports: Monthly
and weekly accountability
Remember getting report cards from school? They showed how well you were
doing in each subject and what you needed help with. Your property receives
a similar report from the property management company. Property manage-
ment will likely send you status reports on different parts of the property. For
example, it will send you reports regarding the income, the delinquent income
or late payments, the expenses in detail, how many vacant apartments or
spaces you have, and what maintenance was performed on the property
during the month, just to name a few. In the following sections, we explain the
two different types of reports that you’re likely to receive: monthly and weekly
reports. Weekly reports are rarely used, but they are just as important as
monthly reports. To get the most out of reporting, make sure you incorporate
weekly reporting. Later in this chapter, we go into detail about what weekly
reports are composed of and more important, why we do it.
Typical monthly reports
Certain property management reports are sent to you once a month. These
reports are sent monthly to give you the “big picture” of how the property is
performing both financially and operationally. See Table 11-1 for a list of the
typical reports that you’re likely to receive each month.
Table 11-1 Typical Monthly Reports
Monthly Report
Details within the Report
Accounts receivable Detailed rent rolls of tenants with gross potential
report rent included
Vacancy report showing empty units or space
Vacancy report showing if empty units or space
are preleased
Accounts payable Check register showing who each check was paid to
report Expense distribution breaking down the expenses
into sections
(continued)
207Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship?
Table 11-1
(continued)
Monthly Report
Details within the Report
General ledger report Balance sheet
Profit/loss (operating statement) — monthly
Profit/loss (operating statement) — year-to-date
Maintenance and work Requests for maintenance (by tenants) and status
order activity report of the repairs
Budget and capital A list of work that’s scheduled, in
improvements report progress, and completed
Don’t stand for late reporting. If you were promised a set of reports on the
first of every month and the reports are late, contact your property manager.
Ask why the reports are late and be adamant about getting them immediately.
If you don’t hold the property manager accountable for this now, other
important duties may start slipping as well. After all, it’s human nature for
folks to procrastinate when they can.
Weekly reports
We’ve come up with a weekly accountability system that’s simple and easy to
follow and understand, but most important, that’s very effective. First of all,
this system is designed to be easy for the property manager to follow, fill out,
and report on. Because there’s nothing complex about it, your property man-
ager can’t come up with any excuses why she can’t turn it in on time. You
should ask to receive this report every Monday morning.
The idea of accountability is to focus weekly on key items such as occupancy,
marketing, rent collection, rent delinquencies, and maintenance items. Why
ask for a weekly rather than a monthly report? Well, think of it this way:
Normally, owners speak with their property managers once per month (or
once every 30 days) on the status of their properties. So, what happens if a
vacancy issue occurs on the fifth of the month? You probably wouldn’t find
out until the first of next month, right? So, almost a month goes by before you
can even address this vacancy issue. However, if you get a weekly account-
ability report, you would know about this issue and could promptly set forth
on resolving it on the same day that it’s reported. In this case, you have the
ability to be proactive rather than reactive.
We like to describe this accountability system with a sports metaphor. For
example, when you’re playing a game and you want to look at the score
quickly, what do you do? You look at the scoreboard, of course! The score-
board lets you know how you’re doing — how many points you’re ahead or
behind, who has the ball, who’s up next, how much time is on the clock, and
so on. Figure 11-1 shows an example of a one-page property scoreboard.
208 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
This report is an exact copy of what we get on a weekly basis. Show this to
your current or to-be-hired property manager as an example of what you
require. The key to making it not overbearing to your property manager is
to keep it to a single page in length. From this report we can see critical
information that gives you a “scoreboard” view of how your property is
performing from week to week. You’ll be able to see upward or downward
trends in income, vacancies, and maintenance issues — all important
accountability items.
The
To:
From:
Date: 10/21/05
Re: weekly report as of 10/21/05
Pages: 1
Property:
Occupancy Status:
Apartments (Your Property)
(Property Owner -- You)
(Management Company)
Apartments Total Units: 94
Current move-in bonus: one month free stopped as of 10/1
Vacants: 6 Leased: 4 Move Ins: 2 Total Made Ready Units: 5
Traffic Generated From: resident referral, drive by, local paper
Potential Income (if 100% rented): $54,506
Collected Income: $48,730 as of 10/10
Delinquent Amount: $2582
Maintenance Calls:
3 beds
Type
1 beds
2 beds
8
# of units
26
60
$699
Rate
$499
$599
1050
Sq. Ft.
650
850
0
Vacants
4
2
6
0
Leased
2
2
Notices to
move out
1
Total Available
2
Appliance
6
AC
1
Plumbing Electrical
3
Key
3
Other
Figure 11-1:
A weekly
property
report.
209Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship?
Knowing How to Be an Effective
Absentee Owner
An absentee owner is an owner of a property that doesn’t personally manage
or reside on the property owned. An out-of-state owner could fall into that
category. These types of owners often get a bad rap. Why? Because absentee
owners have been known to ruin properties and cause decay in the neighbor-
hoods where the properties are located. This weakening happens not only
because the owner is physically absent from the property, but because
they’re emotionally absent as well. Their lack of involvement in the care and
operation of the property causes the property to head in a downward spiral.
This in turn affects the quality of the tenants that the property attracts as
well as the overall neighborhood feel.
Here are signs and symptoms that you may be turning into an absentee owner:
 You never visit the property.
 You’re in denial that the property is in financial trouble.
 The city officials don’t like you.
 Your property has become or is located in what people refer to as a
“war zone.”
 Nobody, except criminals, wants to live on the property.
 You don’t spend money on preventive maintenance and capital
improvements.
 Your maintenance solution for everything is to place temporary ban-
dages on much-needed fixes.
However, don’t worry; it is possible to be a positive, well-respected, and suc-
cessful absentee owner. The first step is to turn the previous list of negative
symptoms into positives. For instance, simply visit your property more often
and see what’s going on and what needs fixed. Second, give thoughtful atten-
tion to the way the property looks. Also, be sure to get (positively) involved
with the city officials — they can help you out more than you’d think. And
don’t allow criminals on the property.
Here are some other ways that you can put your best foot forward:
 Have a precise management plan. Before you buy the property, know
who the property management will be. Hire a well-known and battle-
proven property management company that knows exactly what it’s
going to take to successfully run the property. As one of our mentors
once said, “If you fail to plan, plan to fail.” A good and well-thought-out
business plan has a property summary, a market analysis, a sales and
marketing plan, a management summary, and a financial plan.
210 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
 Understand the infrastructure. A successful property infrastructure
means having an accounting system, a sales and marketing system, an
operations system, and a maintenance system. When considering a
property, make sure that it has an infrastructure and determine how well
it’s working. If it isn’t working, can it be fixed without breaking the bank?
Know exactly what you’re buying.
 Know the market. Before you buy a property, understand the market
conditions and know what’s going on. Be sure to consider lease rates,
rental rates, move-in bonuses, vacancy rates, job growth, population
growth, and any upcoming economic development in the city.
 Have an exit strategy in place. Know upfront, before you even make any
offers, why you’re purchasing the property. Are you buying it for cash
flow, to refinance later, as a tax shelter, or for long-term growth? In fact,
knowing your reasoning upfront may even cause you to pass on the deal
altogether. It may even stop you from purchasing a property that’s hun-
dreds or thousands of miles from your area.
 Be ready to commit. Be ready to commit time, money, and management
to the property to ensure its success. And remember that not all proper-
ties — even those of the same type — are the same. Some properties
may take years to stabilize the income and occupancy, while others may
take months. So, always plan for longer than you expect.
 Buy a large enough property. Purchase a property that allows you to
afford a staff for operation. The smaller the property, the smaller the
income. And the smaller the income, the less hired help you can afford.
In your analysis of the property, make sure that you can afford a prop-
erty management company and its staff.
 Plan for a rainy day. Rainy days are bound to happen in the commercial
real estate business. Roof failure, water damage, and broken boilers are
all common problems that you may come across. Have money saved up
for these issues, and be sure to have reputable vendors lined up for
when the problems strike.
 Visit the property routinely. No matter how far away you are from the
property, plan on paying a visit to the property at a minimum of once
per year although twice or three times is recommended. However,
during the first year of ownership, quarterly visits are recommended.
Throw in a surprise visit every now and then too.
211Chapter 11: Property Management: Who’s Minding Your Ship?
212 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
Chapter 12
Protecting Your Assets
In This Chapter
 Understanding why you need protection
 Determining how to protect your assets
 Using common-sense strategies
Want to hear some things that may keep you up at night? More than 90
million lawsuits are filed in the United States each year. And in this
country there are more attorneys per capita than in any other civilized coun-
try in the world. Right now the United States has over 700,000 attorneys with
another 100,000 in law schools. To stay in business and support their families,
many of these attorneys have to file or defend lawsuits instead of preventing
the lawsuits from happening.
That’s where asset protection comes in. You may be thinking “I don’t want to
have so many assets that someone is going to try to come after me.” The sad
truth is that you can be sued for anything. With attorneys willing to take
cases on a contingency basis, you may very well become a target whether
you think you are or not.
Asset protection can be quite confusing to the newbie investor. And because
every real estate investor needs to have it, you need to get a handle on it.
We’ve got you covered in this chapter. We provide tips on some of the best
things you can do right now to help protect yourself against any legal attacks
that may come your way.
Always take the time to properly set up your business, including getting any
operating or partnership agreements in writing and signed by all parties. If
you’re already in business and don’t have any operating or partnership agree-
ments in place, make it a top priority to complete these as soon as possible. If
you purchased an investment with buddies and you have no operating or
partnership agreements in place, you’re setting yourself up for a potential
headache. Countless times we have seen “once-in-a-lifetime” deals for sale,
and when we inquired why the owner was selling, we often found that it was
because the partnership was dissolving due to “business differences.” In other
words, the partners are fighting and the property is paying the price. And by
not having the correct agreements in place, each side’s attorneys get involved,
and we all know what happens when attorneys get involved, don’t we?
Taking Asset Protection Seriously
Most investors never get around to setting up any type of asset protection for
themselves. Why? Because of the following two reasons:
 They think they don’t have enough assets right now to worry or do any-
thing about protecting them.
 They have assets and are steadily building their net worth but are either
too busy or too confused about the process to do anything about it.
People face so many financial disasters today stemming from events like
divorces and deaths of family members to lawsuits. The IRS can also be a
major threat to your financial success these days.
Preventing all these financial woes rolls into what is called asset protection.
It’s a combination of legal protection, tax planning, and estate planning. All
these areas act together to form a foundation so that if you get sued, you
don’t necessarily lose everything you own.
Understanding asset protection can be quite difficult at first because every
“expert” seems to recommend something different. Our advice is to read
Guaranteed Millionaire by Lee Phillips, Esq (www.guaranteedmillionaire
book.com). Unlike any other book we’ve read, this one spells out what to do
to create the asset protection that you need without having to set up compli-
cated offshore trusts. However, because the book is self-published, you may
not be able to get it from your local bookstore.
Create a plan to avoid lawsuits
Part of running a successful business includes having a plan to help create a
consistent, predictable outcome for your customers. It’s amazing how many
property owners don’t follow an asset protection plan that’s designed to keep
the financial dragons away. You can avoid lawsuits by doing the following:
 Conducting your business in a professional manner: This covers every-
thing from hiring, leasing, and negotiating. Keep it professional and
you’ll avoid the hot water that others may fall into.
 Keeping your properties in good operating condition: Owners who
allow their properties to deteriorate into unsafe or unlivable conditions
are just asking for a lawsuit. So step up to the plate and create the sys-
tems to take care of your properties.
 Staying mum about your money and equity (especially if you have a
lot): If you flash a lot of cash, you may attract the attention of someone
who may be looking to start a frivolous lawsuit. Frivolous or not, a law-
suit is still going to cost you in time, frustration, and attorney fees.
214 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
The fact of the matter is that law schools are graduating so many lawyers
these days that in order to eat, they have to fill in a gap by conjuring up law-
suits. So, if you’re investing in real estate and conditions are ideal for a
lawsuit, then that lawsuit will likely rear its ugly head.
Plan for the worst and be
happy if it doesn’t happen
One of the challenges you may have with proper asset protection is that you
may never need it. You may hope that you never have anyone challenging
you for the wealth that you’ve built up, but unfortunately in today’s society
it’s crazy not to have proper asset protection in place. In fact, if you never
have a situation come along in your life where someone goes after the wealth
you have protected, you’re fortunate indeed.
After a disaster occurs, it’s too late to set up your asset protection. You have
to do it now. The question we often hear is “Who needs it?” Our resounding
answer: Everybody needs it! We’re talking about the tools of wealth here. And
we’ve never met a wealthy person who doesn’t use these tools. You can’t
build a house from the roof down. You have to have a foundation first. The
same goes for your financial fortune. Check out the upcoming section to find
out how to set up your protection.
We operate today in a society that relies on the written word. So, to protect
yourself, your agreements need to be in writing; otherwise, all bets are off.
Remember that old saying, “The pen is mightier than the sword?” We’ve seen
situations in which people thought they had agreements, but then they read
what they actually had in writing. The language turned out to be different
than they thought, leading them to lose out on big bucks in addition to possi-
bly taking on more liability than originally thought.
Building a Legal Fortress
for Personal Assets
The right time to prepare for an attack is before it ever comes. You wouldn’t
want to start building a castle when an enemy is marching over the hill. A
little preparation ahead of time goes a long way toward giving you the peace
of mind you deserve.
Proper asset protection can save you an extra $10,000 to $20,000 a year in
taxes. For example, with it in place, if someone in the family dies, there usu-
ally is little to no economic tax loss and very little legal loss to the family
members. These are important things to think about today.
215Chapter 12: Protecting Your Assets
So, it’s time to ask, “How do I legally protect my assets from those who want
to put their hands in my pockets?” And to find out how, simply read on.
Making use of entities
If you aren’t into paperwork and details, putting together business entities
such as corporations and limited liability companies can seem pretty intimi-
dating. What do we mean by entity? An entity is considered to be a separate
“legal person.” The advantage of entities is that by keeping all of your invest-
ing business in the legal name of your business entity, any liabilities from the
business may harm the business itself but not you personally because you’re
a different “legal person.”
You can create multiple entities so that if you do have a loss, you only risk
losing a part of your business rather than losing everything. The advantage
of this strategy is that your personal assets, such as your house, your car,
and your bank accounts, are kept separate from your business. That way if
something goes wrong with your business or someone sues you, your per-
sonal assets aren’t lost also.
Make sure that whenever you sign anything for your business, you add both
your title and the name of your business entity after your name. To make it
easy for someone to get in touch with you, include your phone number and
e-mail address.
Corporations
A corporation exists entirely apart from its owner. It has unique and beneficial
legal and tax advantages when compared to owning and operating real estate
as an individual. Corporations must have at least one owner, but there’s no
maximum. The owners are called shareholders or stockholders. The legal ben-
efits include liability protection of your personal assets. Incorporating your
real estate business safeguards your personal assets against creditors and
lawsuits. Stockholders usually aren’t liable for their company’s debts and
obligations. They’re usually limited in liability to the amount they have
invested in the corporation. For example, if a stockholder purchased $1,000
in stock, he can’t lose more than $1,000 of his personal assets.
It isn’t a good idea to hold real estate in a corporation. It will most likely cost
you an arm and a leg in taxes. Why? You’ll be taxed twice. The way corpora-
tions are set up, you’ll pay taxes on the income reported. Then the left over
income is distributed to shareholders as dividends and it’s taxed again. So
you’re doubly taxed and defeat one of the great perks of real estate investing:
tax sheltering.
A great use of corporations in real estate investing is to use them to manage
properties. Here’s how: You hold your real estate in limited liability compa-
nies (LLCs), which are explained in the following section, and the LLCs report
216 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
to the corporation that you set up. This way, you completely remove yourself
individually from liability because you have two layers of protection.
Limited liability companies
The most popular choice these days for holding real estate is the limited lia-
bility company (LLC). It isn’t a corporation or partnership, but it has the
liability protection of a corporation and the tax benefits of a partnership. The
main benefit of a limited liability company is that the income, expenses, and
profits flow through to the members of the LLC, and then they’re taxed indi-
vidually and only once. Also, members can’t be held personally liable for
company debts and liabilities unless they signed as personal guarantors, hence
the term “limited liability.” Whereas in corporations, you’re required to hold
meetings and keep minutes, LLCs require no meetings or minutes. Even though
LLCs have been around since 1977, their overall flexibility makes them the
most popular form of ownership used today. A great resource for getting up to
speed on using LLCs is Limited Liabilities Companies For Dummies (Wiley).
The beauty of an LLC lies in its “check one box” taxation, meaning that you
can literally choose how you want to be taxed — as a sole proprietor, a part-
nership, or a corporation.
LLCs do have certain disadvantages, however. They’re dissolved when a
member dies or goes bankrupt. A corporation, on the other hand, can go
on forever, even as shareholders die.
Don’t put too many properties into one LLC. If you have six properties being
held in one LLC, and you get sued from one of the properties, the other five
properties become a target as well. The rule of thumb that we use is this: If
one property has 10 percent or more equity in it, give it its own LLC.
Don’t throw your entities under the bus
Entities are a great way to protect your personal assets when business deals
go sour. But if you make the mistakes we mention in the following sections,
you can lose the protection that the entities give you. For example, if you fail
to follow the guidelines and rules of your entity, the protection it provides
may be removed, opening yourself up to personal liability (lawsuits) and loss
of tax advantages.
Mixing personal and business funds
Your business account should have its own checking account that isn’t ever
used to pay for personal expenses. We’ve found that having a separate credit
card that’s used just for business expenses helps to keep things separate as
well. So, when you’re paying for something for your commercial real estate
business, use the business checking account, and when you’re out having
dinner with your friends or family, use your personal funds.
217Chapter 12: Protecting Your Assets
The risk is that if you’re mixing personal and business funds, then you really
aren’t running your corporation or LLC like a real business. In other words, if
you take a trip to the Bahamas on your business’s credit card, someone may
be able to “pierce the corporate veil.” This means that a business creditor
can claim that because you aren’t running your business like it should be run
she may be able to come after your personal stuff.
Ignoring your state’s laws or corporate formalities
Some states have guidelines that may be required for you to get the asset
protection that you’re expecting. For example, some states require your lim-
ited liability company to have at least two members in order to receive liabil-
ity protection. Or if you fail to meet certain annual state requirements like
filing an annual report, paying franchise taxes, or maintaining a Registered
Agent, the Secretary of State may dissolve the company.
You also need to make sure that you follow the formalities of running your
entity. For example, be sure to keep minutes of your meetings and to docu-
ment the major decisions that your entity has made.
Signing personally on real estate or business loans
When your investing business, say, ACME Investing, LLC, for instance, needs
to borrow money to purchase a commercial property, you may be asked to
sign personally to guarantee the loan. What this means is that if your LLC
can’t make the payments, you’re responsible for making the payments out of
your pocket. If you don’t or can’t make the payments, the lender then has the
right to go after your personal assets as further collateral after foreclosing on
the property. This situation is obviously one you want to avoid. So what are
your options?
The best type of loan to get is a nonrecourse loan, which is secured solely by
the commercial property itself. And in the event of a default on the payments,
the lender’s only collateral is the property itself, meaning that you, person-
ally, have not signed on or are guaranteeing the loan.
However, one of the interesting parts of commercial real estate is that the
larger properties are much more likely to get nonrecourse loans. In most
cases, loans in the range of $2 million qualify for nonrecourse consideration.
The reason for this is that if your entity, ACME Investing, LLC, owns a shop-
ping center that’s worth $30 million dollars, your personal assets probably
won’t be able to cover the payments. So, with larger properties, the lenders
are usually very cautious and lend only on commercial property that can
easily make the payments. Unfortunately, smaller commercial properties
(less than $2 million loan amount) aren’t eligible for nonrecourse loans. Here
the investors must personally guarantee the loan.
218 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
Gathering essential fail-safe
documentation
When you’re ready to put your asset protection in place, spend some time
with your attorney and tax planner to make sure that all the appropriate
documents are properly prepared. Have these documents handy when
you’re meeting with your attorney and tax planner. Here’s a checklist of
those documents that you need to have prepared:
 A will
 A living will or living trust
 A list of assets (to make it easier for your family when you die)
 An operating agreement (if you own an LLC)
 Articles of incorporation (if you own a corporation)
 A family trust
 Partnership agreements
 Purchase agreements
 Residential leases
 Commercial leases
When people get into trouble, the attorneys or mediators refer to what’s in
writing to see if the language will settle any differences. What you write down
is huge, so you have to direct the lawyers to write down what you want.
Simply getting a piece of legal paper from the lawyer won’t do it for you. You
have to at least be actively involved enough in your real estate investing to
know if what’s being written is what you want. You can’t blindly walk in off
the street and trust the lawyers and other professionals to take care of you if
you haven’t taken the time to at least master the basics.
Common-Sense Protection Tips
We’ve been in business for a combined total of more than 27 years, and in
those years we’ve had — knock on wood — hardly any legal issues come up.
The reason for this boils down to some common-sense formulas. It’s amazing
to see people mistreating their clients and colleagues and then wondering
why everyone seems to be suing them.
219Chapter 12: Protecting Your Assets
The very best way to protect your commercial properties, the equity that
you’ve built up from them, and all of your other assets is to follow these
guidelines:
 Treat others as you would like to be treated.
 Meet any potential problems head-on.
 Always have proper insurance coverage.
Treat others as you would
like to be treated
Life is uncertain. Part of this uncertainty is that although you can’t eliminate
potential legal challenges, you can do business in a way that will help you
avoid most of the problems that are caused by things as simple as basic
greed and disrespect. An example of greed and disrespect would be taking
unfair advantage of a situation where the seller is powerless, for your own
gain. Or it could be when a seller decides to do everything in his or her
power to cancel your purchase contract because someone after the fact has
offered a higher price for his or her property. In both instances, lawsuits are
possible.
If you don’t believe us that mere respect and congeniality can make you suc-
cessful, consider our experiences. We have found that in our millions of dol-
lars of real estate deals we’ve had almost no problems from a legal standpoint.
The reason for this is that we tend to do deals that work for everyone, and
we try our best to avoid making decisions based on just the money or profits.
Meet any potential problems head-on
As soon as you know that someone is unhappy with you, instead of waiting
for a lawsuit to come along when you least expect it, go sit down and meet
with him. Sometimes just taking the time to really hear someone out will
work wonders for both of you.
Most books can tell you how to listen to someone when that person wants to
talk to you. Sometimes, however, it’s important to be able to listen to some-
one when he wants to yell at you. Here’s our secret formula, which we call
the Empathy Unwind Process:
 Connect with the angry person. Get in touch as soon as you can with
the unhappy person. Thank him for getting in touch with you or for
bringing his concerns to your attention.
220 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
For example, say something like “I know that this is difficult for you. It
would have been easier to simply keep quiet, so I want to thank you for
taking the time to bring this to my attention.”
 Clarify the process. Let the person know that your goal is simply to
listen. Then get his agreement by saying something like this: “I’m not
going to promise to come up with a solution today. I just wanted to take
some time to really understand things from your perspective. Is that
okay with you?”
 Draw out the feelings. Draw out all the feelings that the person has so
that he can start to unwind a bit and, more important, understand that
you’ve taken the time to really listen.
 Check for empathy. Ask the person if he feels that you’ve taken the time
to really understand how he feels. Point out that you have your own side to
the story as well, but tell him that isn’t what you’re focusing on today.
 Explain the next steps. Let the person know that you’re going to process
what you’ve heard from him today, thank him for taking the time to
share, and give him a time frame (at least three or four days away) when
you personally will get back in touch with him. Tell him again that you
understand that there are two sides to every story, but that today all
you wanted to do was to simply listen. Then ask the client if he thinks
it’s fair for him to perhaps listen to your side of the story at some point.
Always have proper insurance coverage
Having proper insurance in place to cover your business and assets is essen-
tial to avoiding lawsuits and protecting your assets. To find a good insurance
agent, ask other commercial investors whom they have used in the past. The
right agent will be willing to take the time to both listen to your needs and
also explain which type of coverage is best for you. Here are some tips for
when you’re buying insurance:
 Get new bids every two years. If you get new bids every two years, you
can potentially save yourself thousands of dollars. And as an extra
bonus, the building will be more valuable because you’ve increased the
net operating income.
By looking at our options, we recently were able to lower our insurance
payment 20 percent by switching to a new insurer for one of our large
apartment buildings. With a large complex, this percentage could
amount to tens of thousands of dollars that we save each year.
 Read the entire policy along with any updates that are sent to you.
Look at the coverage amounts and make sure you’re covered sufficiently,
neither over- nor under-insured. And pay close attention to the excep-
tions. In other words, make sure you determine the things that aren’t
covered and the things that have limited coverage or higher deductibles.
221Chapter 12: Protecting Your Assets
 Ask your agent about getting an umbrella policy as an add-on to your
homeowner’s insurance. You may be able to get additional coverage of
$2 to $5 million for a small increase in your premium. Your goal is to
have another line of defense if someone were to sue you personally or if
they were able to somehow break through the other steps you’ve taken
to protect your assets.
 Get help managing your risks. Your insurance company can help you
manage your risks by inspecting your commercial properties for you.
Many insurance companies are glad to pay a visit to your property once
or twice a year to look for potential hazards or simple improvements
that would reduce the risk of lawsuits. After all, both you and your insur-
ance company would like to reduce your chances of a lawsuit as much
as possible.
222 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
Chapter 13
Why Properties Fail
In This Chapter
 Discovering what it means for a property to fail
 Determining how the investor, property management, and the market cause failure
 Knowing when to fold on a property
 Tips on surviving and thriving
Do you remember studying all night for an exam and being completely
ready for it, but when it came time to take it, nothing on the exam was
what you studied for? You probably threw your hands in the air and asked,
“Why did everything go wrong? How did I fail so miserably?”
That’s exactly how coauthor Peter Harris felt when his first real estate failure
happened. As he coped with this failure, he took several real estate and life
lessons from it. For instance, he discovered that every failure in his life had a
cause. And he gained more insight through these failures than he did through
his successes. He also realized that he could come back stronger, smarter,
more humble, more appreciative, and more successful from any failure. And
he has. Countless other investors and entrepreneurs have done the same.
Having said all that, we want to remind you that properties do fail occasion-
ally. And these failures come in many ways, sizes, and circumstances. So, in
this chapter, we go through real-life real estate failures, what causes them,
who causes them, how to avoid them, and how to survive them (and thrive
despite them!).
This chapter could very well be the most important chapter you read. Only
by going through many failures and painful experiences in our years of real
estate investing can we write this chapter. We like to believe that we went
through it all so you won’t have to. But the absolute best part about this is
that we lived and prospered through it all!
What Is a Property Failure?
To understand what a property failure is, first consider the dictionary defini-
tion of what it means to fail. There are three common definitions: to “lose
strength,” to “fade or die away,” and to “stop functioning normally.” Now we’ll
put property failure into perspective regarding these dictionary definitions.
For example, when a property begins to lose strength, its financial condition
is probably in distress. This may mean that as an owner you’re losing money
on a monthly basis. When a property starts to fade or die away, its desirabil-
ity factor is usually gone. The property no longer has curb appeal and no one
wants to move into it. And last, when a property stops functioning normally,
a significant part of your operations, such as rent collections or leasing, likely
isn’t working properly or at all. All these factors can lead to property failure.
With property failure, the owner obviously suffers some consequences. For
instance, as an owner, you may have to do the following:
 Sell the property for a loss.
 Fix your ruined credit and credibility.
 Handle damaged business and partnership relationships.
 Foreclose and give the property back to the bank.
 File for bankruptcy.
 Incur lawsuits from vendors and contractors that you used.
 Deal with investors who lost their investments.
But there is good news in all of this! You don’t have to experience any of this
to be successful in commercial real estate investing. The purpose of this
chapter is to prepare you to find, acquire, and own the best real estate possi-
ble. We set out to show you both sides of the equation so you can spend the
rest of your time on the positive and lucrative side of investing. Use our life
lessons to catapult your investing to greater levels; use them as a road map
to success.
How You, the Investor, Can Cause Failure
The number one cause of property failures is inexperience on the investor’s
part. For example, overenthusiasm and a lack of knowledge from start to finish
can kill investments. Here are the three main ways that you, the investor, can
cause a property to fail: by making bad deals, accruing too much debt, and
staying in denial regarding property problems. We explain each of these in the
following sections.
224 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
Especially if you’re new to real estate investing, don’t be a Lone Ranger. Get
help. Do what you’re best at and hire out the rest. For example, Peter Harris
was absolutely horrible at running the accounting books and he hated it. But,
running the books is a crucial part of any real estate business. So, he hired a
bookkeeper to handle the books. Because the bookkeeper was great at her
job and had a passion for accounting, his business grew. And as the business
grew, he realized that he needed partners to help him get to a higher level.
You made a bad deal
Coauthor Peter Harris’s very first mentor, Nick, gave Peter some great advice
during an intense negotiating session. He said, “As emotions go up, intelligence
goes down.” He was so right. Inexperienced and first-time investors often get
wrapped up and emotionally attached to their properties. They want a first
deal under their belt, so these newbies end up making costly mistakes.
Performing poor due diligence
Because they want their deal to go through, many new investors aren’t look-
ing at their due diligence checklists with an eye of a detective. Instead,
they’re looking at them with an eye of an impatient and anxious investor.
Because of this impatience, they miss things, such as property income and
expense discrepancies, hidden repairs, and bad market data.
This mistake has failure written all over it. A big concern for businesses is
zoning. It’s important to make sure that the property used in the business is
properly zoned and also that the zoning of your neighbor’s property isn’t
going to be a problem. Properties and businesses fail because they don’t
investigate the land use and zoning issues carefully enough. To avoid this
problem, find yourself a real estate attorney and have her thoroughly investi-
gate land use and zoning. But remember that even if you do your homework,
issues can come down the road if governmental agencies or neighbors try to
change the zoning on your property to limit your use of it. Check out Chapter 6
to find how to do thorough due diligence.
Having insufficient market knowledge
Many new investors go into a deal without finding out about the market
they’re buying into. This is a huge mistake because to invest in out-of-state
properties successfully, you need to understand the demographics and
economics of the city that you’re investing in. For instance, if a city has rent
control laws and you purchase a property there with the intention of raising
rents as often as you like, you’re in for a rude awakening because you won’t
be able to.
225Chapter 13: Why Properties Fail
To avoid costly mistakes, do thorough research of rent laws, rent levels,
vacancy rates, and crime statistics. It also helps to know what other owners
are doing to attract and retain tenants. Chapter 4 details the ins and outs of
market research.
Paying too high of a price
Paying too high of a price is a surefire way to lock up your cash flow and prof-
its. New investors tend to overpay because of fear of losing the deal to the
next investor waiting in line if you don’t buy it. When you pay too much, it
typically means that your debt on the property is too large. For the most part,
three expenses on a property remain fixed (or increase, but never decrease)
for an extended time: taxes, utilities, and the mortgage. And these are by far
the property’s largest expenses. If you overpay, you have nothing left after you
pay for these expenses. Paying too much also means that making a profit on a
sale may take longer (or may never even happen!).
The causes of overpaying are not knowing how to crunch and analyze the
numbers properly and not researching what similar properties have recently
sold for in the same area.
Having exit strategy tunnel vision
You’ve likely had tunnel vision sometime in your life, but when it comes to
your career and your exit strategies, take your blinders off — the world
is your oyster. That’s Peter’s motto when he’s planning his own exit strate-
gies. Even though he’s focused on executing his investment strategies, he
leaves an open mind for all possible exit strategies. And here’s why: Local
markets and personal circumstances can change, and after a while, you may
find that a particular exit strategy may not be possible after all. So don’t focus
on one exit strategy. Instead, keep three or four in mind. That way you avoid
having the conversation with your buddies as to “the one opportunity that
got away.” (See Chapter 7 for more information on exit strategies and closing
deals.)
Forgetting to run your properties like businesses
Real estate investing isn’t a hands-off business. So being passive with your
investments inevitably leads to failure. Would-be investors (or new investors)
often and mistakenly think that they can buy a property, and then kick back
and watch the monthly checks roll in. We wish it were that easy. But instead,
just like in any other successful and prosperous business, you have to keep
up with the day-to-day tasks. You have to monitor the budget, manage the
cash flow, make sure tenants are satisfied, maintain a nice property appear-
ance, and know the competition well.
226 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
You have too much debt
If you’ve leveraged yourself too much into the purchase of a piece of prop-
erty and have taken on too much debt, you need to plan for a rainy day. In
fact, you need to know what happens if the storm lasts for more than a few
days. Do you have a cash reserve until the storm passes? Here’s what we
mean: If your monthly mortgage is very large and you encounter an unex-
pected property problem that requires extra cash on a monthly basis to fix,
it’s just a matter of time before cash-flow problems occur. Consider the
following:
 Putting all of your available liquid cash into one deal or property
investment is risky. Yes, you may hit it big, but why take the risk if you
don’t have to? Stuff happens after you own the properties and you need
cash to fix that stuff. If you have no cash available because you used it
all in the purchase, you’re setting yourself up for a cash-flow headache.
Go for the base hits rather than the home run! Then make sure that you
have cash reserves ready to keep you healthy and afloat.
 The most common mistake made in property evaluation is underesti-
mating operating expenses on the property, and the second most
common mistake is overestimating the income of the property. New
investors many times fail to set realistic and achievable financial targets
because they just don’t know how. Here’s what to do to avoid financial
trouble: After you set your property’s financial targets, find someone
who’s a lot more experienced than you are to review your projections.
Or have a professional property management company do the same.
These second opinions are great reality checks because they keep you
from going into cash-flow dreamland. The best advice anyone can give
you is to give yourself some cushion in your projections.
Proformas, which are “best-case” or “perfect-world” financial reports on
a property, are prepared by the real estate agent and given to you. Often
times, proforma financial numbers are unreachable. So, don’t purchase
or make offers based on the financial picture that the proformas paint.
Proformas should only be used to draw attention to prospective buyers;
never use them as actual financials. To avoid getting duped by the num-
bers, double-check every bit of data given by a Realtor and construct
your own financial projections of the property.
 It takes time (years!) to build a real estate fortune. Acquiring too many
properties too fast and highly leveraging yourself too quickly is a sure-
fire way to collect many properties that perform at average or below
average levels. Being debt-heavy is too stressful. Instead, strive to
collect a smaller number of properties that all perform well and have
smaller, more manageable debts. To do so, start smartly and within
your comfort zone.
227Chapter 13: Why Properties Fail
You’re in denial regarding problems
Say, for example, that your significant other stops calling and replying to your
e-mails. And then your birthday passes without even a word or gift. Is the
writing on the wall? It sure is! You must have messed up somewhere and now
he or she is trying to get rid of you! In situations like these, you can’t be in
denial; you have to face the truth.
The same goes for real estate. When you start having problems with a prop-
erty, something has to be done. Simply ignoring the problems or denying that
they’re there won’t make them go away. Even your authors have fallen prey
to denial. Just remember that the denial of property problems is a major
cause of property failures. Here are some of the most commonly denied
symptoms:
 Poor curb appeal: The most important part of keeping your property
occupied with paying tenants is to keep it looking nice, clean, and attrac-
tive. Imagine looking for an apartment to rent for yourself and having a
choice between a bright, shiny, and nicely manicured apartment build-
ing and one with an overgrown lawn, missing screens, and loose shingles.
Which one would you walk into? A property that resembles the latter is
showing symptoms of financial distress. Being in denial in your property’s
appearance goes straight to the bottom line.
 Missed monthly mortgage payments: This symptom of distress is a
pretty obvious one. Consider those who have had trouble paying the
mortgage on their homes. The reason they had trouble was because
they had money problems. They had too much month at the end of the
money! The same trouble applies to owners of a commercial property —
they can have money problems too. Just remember that missed mort-
gage payments serve as the writing on the wall. Something’s obviously
amiss if the owner can’t come through with the payments.
 High vacancy levels: When a property has experienced higher vacancy
levels than its comparable neighbors for months on end, don’t be in
denial, and consider yourself forewarned. A high vacancy level generally
means that the owner doesn’t have the money to prepare the vacant
space for a tenant, let alone market it efficiently. In this case, tenant
turnover is likely to be higher as well.
 A struggling market: Even if your property is in good physical shape,
there’s no guarantee that the leasing market will be strong. The problem
with a struggling market is that you can’t place paying tenants into your
property if the tenants or their businesses don’t exist. We have been in
this situation before and we were forced to deeply lower our lease rates
and offer huge incentives to attract tenants. When this happens, supply
simply outweighs the demand, and then you run into greater competi-
tion for a smaller number of tenants. Face the truth sooner, by getting
aggressive in your leasing strategies by deciding whether to have zero
rent in a soft market or a little rent in soft market.
228 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
A way to spot high vacancy levels and struggling markets is to research
market concessions. Concessions are incentives given out by the prop-
erty to entice people to lease from you. An example of a concession
would be one month free rent or a reduced move-in security deposit.
If you see a lot of concessions in a market, you know that quite a few
vacancies need to be filled. A market that’s full of vacancies is called a
soft market. If you invest in a soft market, be prepared to operate a prop-
erty with a larger vacancy factor than usual.
 Lack of lease renewals: Because leases are the lifeblood of the commer-
cial real estate business, tracking lease expirations and renewing them
becomes crucial to your survival. If the property’s leases are expiring
and not being renewed or extended frequently, you’re headed for trouble.
Managing your lease expirations is as critical as the leasing itself. So
make sure to stagger your lease expiration dates across the property.
Avoid having a bunch of leases expire in the same month. Consider what
the consequences would be if 10 of your 12 tenants’ leases expired all in
the same month. Instead, stagger the dates to spread out your risk.
 Inability to pay normal bills: When bills such as landscaping, phone,
elevator service, security, and advertising go unpaid, you’ve come across
a danger sign. And when your leasing manager is handling more bill col-
lector calls than leasing calls, trouble has arrived. Instead of living in
denial, strategize on a new cash-flow management system that includes
working with vendors by making partial payments for a while.
There is no shortcut on avoiding denial, even in real life. It comes down to
taking ownership and responsibility of what you’re in charge of. Facing cold
hard facts of the matter is what makes truly successful people successful.
How Management Can Cause
a Property to Fail
Most people can recall or know of a once-prosperous company that either
made major management changes or brought in new management and the
result was a disaster. The company had everything going for it — great staff,
great product, great operations, great brand, and the list goes on and on. But,
unfortunately, the management made mistakes and ruined the company’s
success.
The number one reason that investors fail is because they poorly manage
their property or hire incapable property managers (and don’t forget that
this failure can happen to both inexperienced and experienced investors!).
No matter who fills the position, the property manager must be an effective
leader. An effective leader does the following:
229Chapter 13: Why Properties Fail
 Works from a business plan
 Sets goals and takes responsibility for the results
 Defines the roles of the staff under him or her
 Confronts operational problems head-on and finds workable solutions
 Encourages the staff
 Provides direction when needed
 Knows his or her capabilities and knows when to ask for help
We highly recommended that when beginning your quest for acquiring a
property you “lead” with a professional property management company.
What we mean is that you find reputable property management for the type
of asset that you’re pursuing in that city before you even make offers to pur-
chase. If you can’t find experienced and trustworthy property management in
that city, don’t buy the property. It’s that simple.
If you spot any of the following management warning signals, take action
immediately:
 Your management is failing to manage. This warning sign is dangerous
and sets a precedent. If your management is failing to act, you may
notice that it isn’t holding the onsite property manager accountable to
the expected promises and actions, it isn’t calling and meeting with the
managers consistently, and it isn’t reading the property reports regu-
larly. The performance of a property like this one is headed for a crash
and burn. You, as the owner, can take action by starting at the top of the
food chain. Get the property management company’s management in
conference immediately. Be very specific going over your concerns.
Don’t depart until action items have been agreed on and delegated.
 Your management seems to be clueless at times and is always ineffec-
tive at operating the property efficiently. With ineffective management,
you’ll have higher than market vacancies, higher expenses, late property
reports, poor communication, and arguments. In the end, you won’t
have a chance to be profitable. So what do you do? Start interviewing
other companies for hire and cut your ties with the current company as
quickly as possible.
When hiring professional property management, make sure that the can-
didate has extensive experience in managing the type of property that
you’re acquiring. For example, if you’re acquiring a 100-unit apartment
building, don’t hire a company that only has experience in managing
retail strip centers. Managing, marketing, and operational strategies are
different as night and day.
230 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
 Your property manager is ripping you off. Yes, your property manager
can rip you off. It’s unfortunate, but true: They can steal from you, lie to
you, and hide things from you. The consequences of this disrespect can
be devastating — it can set you back financially for months or years. It
can even send you into foreclosure. How do you spot a thief? First of all,
have your finances audited at least once per year. You can also monitor
the cash like a hawk by verifying bank deposits and receipts to checks.
It’s also smart to visually verify completed work and physically verify
rented space or units.
To avoid getting ripped off, consider getting some of your employees or
your property management’s employees bonded. Bonding is an insur-
ance contract in which an insurance agency guarantees payment to an
employer in the event of unforeseen financial loss because of the actions
of an employee. You don’t have to get every employee bonded, but it’s
smart to at least bond the ones who have access to money or accounts.
Luckily, bonding isn’t very costly.
 You’re being managed by your own property. If you’re managing a piece
of property yourself, it’s easy to start losing perspective of who you are.
You’re the owner and you’re in charge. When your property begins to
run you instead of you running it, you’ll start making business decisions
based on your current circumstances rather than from your set business
plan and financial goals. You’ll easily get off track, and that’s when things
can start to unravel and fall apart. To avoid having your property run
you ragged, set appropriate boundaries. Don’t take work or your work
attitude home. Have a phone dedicated for work and shut it off at quit-
ting time. Have an after-hours service set up or have others on-call for
after-hour service calls or for other non-emergencies.
 Your property doesn’t have a business plan. A business plan guides
you and your property in the right direction when it comes to making
business decisions. It can help you determine when to study the compe-
tition, it can help figure out your property’s strengths and weaknesses,
and it can set performance benchmarks that keep other management
members on track. If your property doesn’t have a business plan, from
what basis are you making business decisions? Every property goes in a
certain direction, but it may not be going in a profitable and sustaining
one. A business plan can be your compass. A good and well-thought-out
business plan has a property summary, a market analysis, a sales and
marketing plan, a management summary, and a financial plan.
Property management is a favorite topic when commercial investors get
together. We like to collect horror stories and then brainstorm ways to sys-
tematically remove the possibility of having the same issue come up again.
To get mentoring help with your property management challenges or to read
some of the recent solutions, go to www.commercialmentoring.com.
231Chapter 13: Why Properties Fail
How the Market Can Cause Failure
Owning commercial real estate can be more dynamic than you ever thought
it would be. For instance, you may not have ever imagined that you would
have to concern yourself with levels of inflation, interest rates, job growth,
and population growth as an investor of an apartment complex or a down-
town office building. And you may not have realized why it’s important to
know where your market is headed if you plan to develop a strip mall on a 10-
acre site. But deal making and daily business decisions need to be made and
carried out. And if you don’t take these market issues into consideration, you
might choose investments that miss their financial targets.
The behavior of your market can cause your property to fail. So, you need to
know what influences your market and how to spot and identify these influ-
ences. The next two sections break things down simply.
The ups and downs of real estate cycles
As you’re probably well aware, our nation’s economy is cyclical. For a few
years, we’re going like gangbusters, and then for a few years after that, we
slow down to a snail’s pace. Luckily, for the most part, economists can tell us
when the economy is growing, stagnating, or shrinking. Real estate undergoes
the same type of cyclical pattern. At times your market may grow and at
other times it doesn’t. In fact, it may even shrink back a bit sometimes.
Just don’t forget that it’s possible to misunderstand your market’s real estate
cycle, and this misunderstanding can cause your property to fail. For exam-
ple, if you buy property at the following times, you’re likely setting yourself
up for failure:
 Buying at the end of a boom: Buying at the end of a boom (or at the top
of the real estate cycle) sets you up for failure in more ways than one. At
this point, the market is saturated. Rent prices level off and drop a little.
The supply of new buildings outweighs the demand and then vacancies
increase. After vacancies increase, you have to drop your rent prices
and offer incentives. This starts the downward financial spiral because
as your income decreases, your expenses stay the same (or get even
higher). And as your income decreases, you obviously have less money
available to keep the property in tiptop shape.
 Buying during a recession: It pays to know if your market is in a reces-
sion or if it’s headed for that part of the cycle. In a recession, you can
expect new supply on the market (more competition) and demand for
rentals and space to decline. You can also expect rent prices to fall and
vacancies to reach all-time highs. Your typical investor flees from this
market, which means that property values will plummet and foreclo-
sures become more apparent. Not a pretty picture for most.
232 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
 Buying at rock bottom: Call yourself a bottom fisher if you buy property
in this part of the cycle. If you invest here, your hope is that you have
reached the bottom of the cycle and the market is starting to recover.
In real estate, there’s a fine line between the end of a recession and the
beginning of the recovery period. You may catch it perfectly and reap
the benefits or you may miss it and experience more recession or years
of delay waiting for recovery to start. Because you’re rolling the dice,
having a sizable cash reserve is suggested when investing at this time
in the cycle. Cash gives you holding power.
The best way to spot one of the previous three cycles is to know the vacancy
rate in your market. In a recession or down market part of the cycle, for
example, the vacancy rate is at an all-time high. In a recovery part of the
cycle, the vacancy rate is decreasing towards neutral. As the cycle heads
toward the top to the expansion or new construction cycle, vacancy rates
reach an all-time low. So before you invest, do your research and make your
phone calls to property management companies and leasing companies to
find out what the vacancy situation is in your market.
There’s no such thing as an all-purpose real estate cycle that you can use for
your everyday commercial real estate investing decisions. And there’s no
national market either. Cycles differ for apartments, retail, office, industrial/
warehouse, and leisure in each geographic area. Each type has its own set of
unique dynamics. What this means is that you can’t take a real estate cycle
study of offices and use it for the cycle study of your apartment deal. In addi-
tion, real estate cycles differ in locale and geography. For example, a small
suburb outside of Chicago could have a stark difference in real estate cycles
compared to the city of Chicago itself. And likewise, Chicago’s real estate
cycles could be much different than our national real estate cycle. Be specific
when studying real estate cycles in your market — research the property
type and the exact property location.
The influence of demographics
In real estate investing, we define demographics as “the movement of people.”
Where the people go, we go. Where the people are not, we’re not. It’s that
simple. If you have a lack of people in your market, who’s going to lease and
rent from you? Or if you see a trend of people moving out of your market,
how bright does the market’s future look? Consider the following few demo-
graphic pieces, which if not followed and accounted for can lead to property
failure:
 Negative population growth: If your market is experiencing a wave
where more people are moving away than are moving in, that’s a red
flag you need to watch. Why? The movement of people away from your
market negatively impacts home prices, retail sales, and the overall
economy. As your pool of possible tenants decreases, the competition
233Chapter 13: Why Properties Fail
for tenants also increases. After the competition for the limited number
of tenants increases, you have to lower your rents and offer incentives
to keep your property full of paying tenants. The result is lower income,
which doesn’t bode well for the future success of the property. Trouble
looms if the trend continues long term.
To attain the population growth data for your market, it’s okay to start
with the U.S. Census Bureau. However, remember that it only presents
data every ten years. For more up-to-date data, go to the local chamber
of commerce and request population growth data up to the present year.
Population data can change quite drastically over a five-year period.
 No job growth: When job growth is missing from your market, you’re
likely to see a slowdown in single-family home sales and retail sales. A
lack of job growth also causes most commercial real estate to experience
higher vacancies. Have you, for example, ever been to a small town that’s
very quiet and still and has no growth? If you contrast that town with one
that’s lively with new construction and people and cars buzzing around,
you can easily see the difference. To find out job-growth data, start with
the local chamber of commerce and the office of economic development.
To get up-to-date demographics information for your specific market, contact
the city’s office of economic development. Usually, you can find the office’s
contact information online. When you contact the office, you might consider
asking the following questions:
 What has been the percentage of job growth during the last three years?
And what do you forecast for this year?
 What companies are causing these new jobs?
 What new companies are moving in or have moved in?
 What incentives do you provide to these new companies?
 Do you have any upcoming city revitalization programs? If so, in what
areas and when? Who’s funding the program?
 What new building construction has been approved?
 Are there any plans for new highway or freeway off-ramps or on-ramps?
After you gather this information, you’ll have a good feel for the market’s
direction and the amount of growth that has occurred.
Folding Up and Walking Away
Let’s face it. Some properties headed for failure can’t be saved. Some are just
too far off the deep end. In this case, you have to let it go. Your alternative is
to continue pouring money and time into the property. That alternative is
234 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
usually pretty bleak because most people don’t have an endless stream of
money and time to give to a property. However, we believe that the most diffi-
cult part is facing the feelings of failure. But instead of spending more time
and money and spinning your wheels, you have to make a decision, and usu-
ally that decision involves folding up and walking away. When we say “fold,”
we mean making preparations and doing the things necessary to walk away.
Knowing when to fold
Knowing when it’s time to fold up and move on is never easy. After all, how
do you know when the property is truly hopeless? Here are a few clues:
 The property is vacant.
 You’re paying the mortgage out of your own pocket.
 You can no longer pay the employees.
 Your mortgage is in default.
 You’re in foreclosure.
 Your cash reserves are gone because you’ve been in a negative cash-flow
position for an extended period of time.
Choosing to walk away honorably
Folding up shop and giving in is tough to do. Indeed, walking away in defeat
after you’ve tried everything possible is an investor’s worst nightmare. But,
how you choose to walk away from the property affects the overall outcome.
You can either walk away honorably or dishonorably. Obviously we suggest
that you walk away with honor and dignity.
Here’s how you, the investor, can honorably walk away from a failed property:
 Inform everyone who’s impacted by your fold. You don’t need to have
all the answers right now. You simply need to make the call as a profes-
sional courtesy.
The call, for example, may go something like this, “Hi Bob, it’s me. I just
wanted to let you know that I’m folding up shop here. My project failed
and we’re closing down, so I’m calling everyone who’s affected. I’m not
sure what’s going to happen or how things will go from here because I
don’t know myself, but I felt that the right thing to do was to inform you.
Thank you. I’ll be in touch soon.”
 When engaged in conversations concerning the property’s failure, tell
the truth and admit that you blew it. People who are affected by the
failure will be upset already and will be more upset if they sense that
235Chapter 13: Why Properties Fail
you aren’t telling the truth. Being dishonest sets you up for more trou-
ble, whereas a good portion of the disappointment can be defused by
being straightforward and truthful.
 Remember that it isn’t all your fault. When properties fail, some of the
causes may be beyond your control (for example, hidden mold prob-
lems or hard-to-find structural defects). So don’t place 100 percent of the
blame on yourself, the property manager, or the local economy. Do take
some responsibility, but also explain how certain circumstances caused
the failure.
 Never speak a word or make a promise that you can’t back up. Your
words can be used against you legally, and they can also force you to be
on the defensive, which simply adds fuel to the fire. Just be honestly
remorseful and listen.
An investor who walks away dishonorably usually is guilty of
 Not quickly delivering the bad news to everyone who’s been impacted
(for example, employees, partners, investors, contractors, and service
providers). You would be amazed as to how quickly rumors can travel
and cause unnecessary damage to your reputation and integrity.
 Being dishonest in telling those who are impacted what really happened.
Tell them the truth upfront because they’re sure to find out through
someone else anyway.
 Putting the blame on everyone but himself.
 Skipping town, hiding, and avoiding everyone.
Walking away from a deal is tough. If you need some help or encouragement,
connect with our mentoring group some evening. To see the schedule of
events or online discussions go to www.commercialmentoring.com.
Tried and True Tips on
Surviving and Thriving
Because this book is about investing successfully in commercial real estate,
and this chapter is about why and how properties fail, we need to discuss
ways to avoid failure. But we have to do this with caution. We don’t want to
put too much impetus on failure or even avoiding failure because there’s a
big difference between winning at something and not losing at something.
Some may think they’re of the same focus, but they aren’t.
Consider it this way: When you go into a game to win, your focus by defini-
tion is “to be the victor.” When you go into a game to not lose, your focus
becomes by definition to “not suffer deprivation” or to “not bring forth
236 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
destruction.” You’re after the same result, but your focus is different. Of course,
winning is more fun and more rewarding. So, we want to focus on how to invest
in winning properties. Here are some tips for successful investing:
 Fall in love with the deal, not the property. In other words, remember
that the most beautiful property could be a part of the worst deal you
ever make. Real estate investing is all about the deal, the terms, and the
return on investment.
 Be an investor instead of an accumulator of commercial properties.
The whole idea of making investments is to produce an income or a
profit. So, if you buy a property that produces no income or profit, you
really just acquired a property (instead of making an investment).
Educate yourself so that you can negotiate smartly, know how to crunch
the numbers, and perform thorough due diligence. You also need
to know how financing works so that you can get the best deal available.
Know how to hire and handle property management, and be sure to
follow your exit strategies. Know how to do all of this before you invest
in or purchase any property.
 Understand that every property has a lifetime. Just as human bodies
have a lifetime, properties do as well. When properties get older, they
start to fall apart and need repairs (just like us!). One of the biggest mis-
takes that you can make as an investor is to ignore the fact that over
time, you’ll have to spend money on the cosmetic upkeep of the build-
ing, inside and out. The building may need a roof replacement and the
electric or plumbing systems may need to be updated. All of this can
cost thousands of dollars. Every building goes through these phases and
some more so than others. It really depends on the age and condition.
237Chapter 13: Why Properties Fail
Failure is really just the beginning
One day, Peter Harris was sitting with a well-
known and highly successful investor over
lunch, discussing the subject of making it big in
business. He told Peter, “In order to end up
being really, really successful, you’ll have to
lose it all at least once.” He explained that he
had heard a statistic of the ultra-wealthy that
shows that they have all lost their fortunes at
least once. Peter’s question, of course, was,
“You mean in order to be wildly successful, I
have to go through a major failure first?”
As Peter inquired further, the life lesson he
learned that day was two-fold. Most important,
he learned that those ultra-wealthy and suc-
cessful people took huge risks and lost big time
at some point. But they also eventually won big
time. Big risks equal big rewards. The second
lesson he learned was that their failures didn’t
stop them after they fell on their faces. They got
up, brushed off the dirt, and got back into the
game as a different person altogether. They
were wiser, more determined, and more
humble. And in the end, those are the people
that you want to learn from. To them, failure is
really just the beginning.
So make sure that you have a long-term plan to handle such repairs. To
prepare ourselves for this, we have a reserve account or you can call it a
savings account for each property. Or we’ll refinance the property and
pull money out to do these upkeeps.
If you don’t have such a plan, be prepared for a slow downward trend in
the performance of your property, because a property that’s old-looking,
has antiquated systems, and needs a roof will be undesirable. Prospective
tenants will simply go down the street to the “nicer” property.
 Focus on one investment type at a time. Especially when first starting
out, we highly recommend that you focus on one type of investment:
apartments, offices, retail, land, or whatever your preference may be.
Having an apartment deal and a land deal at the same time is too much
to handle and oversee. Each deal needs and deserves your undivided
attention. It’s better to be master of one than average over many. And
who wants average-performing properties anyway?
 Remember that environmental problems can shut you down. A huge
potential concern when owning commercial property is hazardous waste
problems. Property owners have the primary responsibility for fixing
such problems, even if the current property owner didn’t cause them.
These problems may not be obvious or apparent to the naked eye, and
they could arise from anything ranging from an underground storage
tank to the remains of an old U.S. Navy shipyard.
If at some point you held an ownership interest in a property, you’re
potentially responsible for paying for the clean up of it. The costs for an
environmental cleanup and disposal can run into the millions of dollars.
Obtain an environmental report from environmental assessment compa-
nies as part of your due diligence if needed. The reports cost a bit, but
as the saying goes, “It’s expensive being cheap.”
 Get a mentor so that you can learn from his or her mistakes. Mentors
can save you from making huge mistakes and miscalculations, they can
identify when you’ve missed due diligence items, and they can connect
you with resources that you otherwise wouldn’t have immediate access
to. To find a mentor, go to www.commercialmentoring.com.
We once mentored a new client who came to us with a property already
under contract for $1.8 million. We reviewed the deal and discovered
that the contract price was too high. We had her renegotiate the price
down to $1.2 million and it closed right on time. Mentoring saved her
$600,000 and gained her thousands in cash flow per month.
 Determine whether you and your assets are adequately protected.
Unfortunately, as life happens, so do lawsuits. Tenants and owners
sue each other. That means you need to do everything you can to pro-
tect yourself. Ask yourself the following questions to determine whether
you’re protected:
238 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
• What do you have at stake if you lose a lawsuit?
• How is your property protected?
• Is your property in an LLC?
• Is your personal property (for example, your home) protected?
• Are your other investments totally separate from each other so
that one lawsuit doesn’t affect the other investments?
• Are you sure that your investments are protected? How do you
know? Can your attorney vouch for this?
Don’t guess when it comes to the answers to these questions. Talk to a
lawyer to ensure that you’re protected if you’re sued. (See Chapter 12
for more on protecting your assets.)
 If you’re in a partnership deal, do your best to finance your deal with
a non-recourse type of loan. Non-recourse means that you aren’t person-
ally guaranteeing the loan. This gives you two distinct advantages: it
allows you to be taken off the loan if the partnership goes sour and, if
the property fails, it won’t be tied to you personally.
239Chapter 13: Why Properties Fail
Why we included failure in this book
How many books on real estate investing have
you read? Probably quite a few. And how many
of those books have chapters dedicated to
unsuccessful real estate investing? Probably
none.
The truth is that not every single real estate
investment that you invest in or hear about will
be successful. Some inevitably fail. That’s just a
fact of life. Some of the huge ones make the
news, but most do not. Our goal with this chap-
ter is to provide real-world truths to you. Anyone
who tells you that it’s impossible to go wrong in
real estate is just plain dishonest.
But what you’ll discover is that successful
investing is not magic, but is more common
sense. It’s getting ahead of ourselves and fore-
going attaining knowledge that gets us into
trouble. Any investment you make is as risky as
your level of understanding. So go out there and
get knowledge, start within your comfort zone,
and invest sensibly.
240 Part IV: Day-to-Day Ownership and Operations
Part V
Kicking Your
Investing into
High Gear
In this part . . .
If you’re looking to find out more about commercial
fixer-uppers, you’ve come to the right place. In this
part, we also help you discover the insider secrets to
taking a piece of land through the approval process so
that it can be developed. The advice in Chapter 16 can
save you tens of thousands of dollars in taxes every single
year. Finally, we discuss how to jump into a commercial
real estate career.
Chapter 14
Making a Success Out of
Commercial Fixer-Uppers
In This Chapter
 Figuring out what qualifies as a commercial fixer-upper
 Hunting down potential investments
 Creating a plan to turn the property around
 Knowing what sorts of properties to avoid
 Making a way to pay day
Wow, we are so excited! We get to talk about a subject that’s fascinating
and has made us a lot of money over the years. Normally, when an
investor thinks of a fixer-upper, he or she thinks about a little house on the
corner that needs a new fence, new paint, and a remodeled kitchen. But now
it’s time to think big and consider fixer-uppers in the commercial real estate
world — large apartment complexes, office buildings, strip malls, industrial
projects, and the list goes on. The main differences between investing in resi-
dential real estate and investing in commercial real estate are that commer-
cial projects have larger potential profits and the property needs to be leased
with tenants to give it full value.
In this chapter, we cover what commercial fixer-uppers are, how to locate
them, how to turn the opportunities into sizable profits, how to spot costly
pitfalls, and why commercial fixer-upper opportunities will be around forever
and ever.
We hope that after you read this chapter you’ll get as excited as we do when
you spot a possible fixer-upper opportunity. Your creative juices and can-do
attitude will turn on automatically as you drive through town with a new per-
spective on those run-down buildings.
Just What Is a Commercial Fixer-Upper?
To understand what a commercial fixer-upper is, watch while we take the term
apart and put it back together. Commercial refers to commercial real estate that
can be defined as a retail strip mall, an apartment building, an office building,
or an industrial project, to name a few. And fixer-upper is something you can
buy at a discount because of its poor condition with the intent of fixing it up
and selling it for a profit. Therefore, a commercial fixer-upper is an underper-
forming piece of commercial real estate that you acquire at a discount, fix up,
lease, and sell for a profit. (Or keep for cash flow.)
Here’s an example of a typical fixer-upper. Your favorite grocery and hardware
stores sit in a neighborhood strip mall. But because the owner didn’t spend
any money on cosmetic improvements or new and better-placed signage,
tenants have relocated elsewhere. Three years ago, that same strip mall had
a beauty supply shop, a chain pet store, a family restaurant, and a dry cleaner,
but since then, those shops have moved out and those spaces have sat empty
and untouched. We’re sure that you can drive around your town and spot
such properties. They’re everywhere.
Here’s another common example. A two-story apartment building located in
a decent neighborhood was sold five years ago, and the new owners have
never been seen. A partly torn-down chain-link fence surrounds the sides
and back of the property. You know some of the units are occupied because
you can see curtains in the windows, but at least a third of the units have
boarded-up windows. This one makes you scratch your head because five
years ago, this complex was one of the nicest in the neighborhood.
Once-proud neighborhood commercial properties turn into fixer-uppers when
 The property falls into disrepair and doesn’t bring in the revenue the
owner had hoped for.
 The owners fail to keep up with the property.
Distressed and poorly performing property
A distressed property is a property in a state of desperate need, both exter-
nally and internally. For instance:
 External needs can include improved landscaping, new paint, a new roof,
or maybe a complete reface.
 Internal needs can entail updated electrical and plumbing systems, an
interior remodel, or an earthquake retrofit whereby the structural
integrity needs to be strengthened.
244 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
When maintenance and upkeep aren’t completed in a timely manner, the
property becomes distressed. As these needs go unmet, the property
becomes less desirable for its tenants who either live there or run businesses
from it. As the property deteriorates, tenants move out, and no one wants to
move in. This, of course, affects the property’s financial performance and
sends it into distress mode. With no money to pay for maintenance, the
owner struggles to pay the property’s operating expenses, and the likelihood
that the property will become a fixer-upper is right around the corner.
Signs of a distressed and poorly performing property include
 Overgrown grass and weeds and very poorly kept landscaping
 Lots of vacancies more than 90 days old
 Boarded-up windows and/or evidence of fire damage
 A good percentage of mailboxes without names on them (this indicates
vacancies)
 A property line fenced off with a chain-link fence
 Obviously deferred maintenance
 Lower-class and a lower quality of tenants attracted to the property
 Abandoned appearance
Distressed and poorly performing owner
Once-profitable neighborhood commercial properties can turn into fixer-
uppers because of distressed and poorly performing owners. Properties fail
and become fixer-upper candidates when an owner lacks experience. Often,
new and overenthusiastic owners get in over their heads. They may have too
many repairs to make and not enough money and skills; they may mismanage
the property; or they may take on too much debt. All these scenarios, as well
as others, lead to property distress.
Signs that a property is being poorly managed include the following:
 You find out that the property is in preforeclosure status.
 The property is for sale and the real estate agent tells you that the
owner is very, very motivated and will consider all offers (hint, hint).
 You find out the owner can’t pay normal bills such as water and electric-
ity. In fact, you find shut-off service notices taped on the entry doors.
 You’ve noticed over the last year that the property’s exterior condition
has worsened to the point of “Wow, what happened to that place?”
245Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
When you see “owner financing available” that’s a good sign for you. Get
excited and inquire quickly. Usually, when an owner offers to finance all or
part of the deal, it means she’s really ready to sell the property. One of the
reasons why she’s offering to finance the deal herself is because the property
doesn’t qualify for a traditional loan (where the buyer has to ante up a 20 per-
cent down payment) because of the property’s physical condition, financial
situation, or both. When you set up the financing with the owner, you don’t
have to undergo the usual lender qualifications. You can create whatever
type of deal you two agree on. Deals like this allow you to create incredible
deal-of-a-lifetime, win-win results. (See Chapter 9 for more details on creative
financing.)
Uncovering Diamonds in the Rough
Finding commercial fixer-uppers isn’t a tricky endeavor. In fact, there are more
opportunities than there is demand. Why? Because not many investors want
to buy other people’s problems if they don’t have to. Here’s a disclaimer,
however: Not every commercial fixer-upper is for you. We discuss this a bit
later in the chapter.
How to find fixer-uppers
You can locate commercial fixer-uppers in several ways: scout out properties
yourself or hire someone to do the legwork for you. It’s also possible to find
these properties by looking where no one else is. We cover each of these
options in the following sections.
Look for yourself
When you’re on the hunt for commercial fixer-uppers, you need to open your
eyes and open your mind. Look at each building and ask whether that prop-
erty has the signs of being distressed. (See the earlier section “Distressed
and poorly performing property” for a list of signs.) Do this as you drive
around town or view for-sale listings. Look for preforeclosure and foreclosed
properties through the same resources you’d find foreclosed homes. Make it
a habit to always be on the lookout. In fact, we’re almost obsessed with look-
ing for potential properties when we’re out driving around. It’s all about
mind-set. When we do find a potential fixer-upper, we obtain the owner’s con-
tact information by either calling a title company or going down to city hall
and looking through the recorded deed records.
Never assume that a distressed property without a For Sale sign isn’t for sale.
Quite often, unlisted properties are the best deals around because they don’t
have the baggage of a real estate agent’s advice and marketing. The price you
pay will reflect this. Find out who the owner is and start the communication
246 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
process. You never know where he is in his life. He may be ready to retire,
there may be an illness in the family, or his partnership may be falling apart.
This could be your diamond in the rough.
Hire someone to look for you
Another way to find commercial fixer-uppers is to get someone to find them
for you. You can get help from the following folks:
 Real estate agents: The key to success in working with a real estate agent
is twofold. One, find a real estate agent who can help you find the type of
fixer-upper deals you’re looking for. The agent should be knowledgeable
about the area — especially concerning recent closing prices — and
should know of lenders who can provide favorable financing on proper-
ties in the area. A good agent will filter out the bad deals for you so you
won’t waste his or your time.
The second key to working successfully with your agent is to develop a
good relationship. How you interact with your agent is critical to the
flow of deals coming your way. To be straightforward, if your agent likes
you, deals will come your way. If she doesn’t, she may withhold them.
From the agent’s perspective, your loyalty means a lot. Don’t switch
from agent to agent. Also, don’t make offers just to make offers and
never close a deal. Agents are paid via commissions and will develop a
nose for “closers.” Be a closer. Also, don’t make your agent do all the
work. Volunteer to help out with researching a property that’s sent to
you. She’s on your team, and that’s what successful teammates do.
As for finding an agent to work with, we recommend working with a com-
mercial real estate agent rather than a residential real estate agent. Their
training, industry knowledge, and resources are much different from each
other. The best way to find a reputable commercial real estate agent is by
referral. Ask a fellow investor who he uses and is happy with.
 Online services: Numerous online services can get you started with
locating a commercial fixer-upper. You can choose from free services or
paid subscriptions. The unseen value of online services is the network-
ing you can do from the comfort of your office or home. Many times
coauthor Peter Harris calls the agent and finds out that the property is
no longer available, but he remains in touch with the agent to hear about
future listings and deals. His list of agent contacts and sources of deals
vastly increased because of this.
 Property managers: Property management companies have the inside
track on which properties are in distress or appear to be in distress.
Because they’re managing the property themselves, they already know
that it’s failing and may be able to tell you why. Certain property man-
agement companies have relationships with lenders that are about to or
already have foreclosed on properties. This is your “in” before the prop-
erty makes it to real estate agents.
247Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
The world of property management is a small one. Everybody knows
everybody, and a lot of talk happens in the properties they manage or
know of. We recommend that you go out and find a property manage-
ment company to work with, even if you have no properties yet. How
to interview (and hire) management companies is covered in detail in
Chapter 11.
Many times, our property manager approaches us when his owners are
ready to sell or if he knows of fixer-upper opportunities in his managing
area. If you’re already working with a property manager, make it known
to him that you’re interested in buying if he comes across such a deal. Of
course, it would benefit him, because he would manage it when the deal
closed. Reward the manager with a finder’s fee as an incentive, if possible.
 Attorneys and accountants: Professionals who handle estate affairs can
be a solid source of leads for you as well. Attorneys handle estates that
contain numerous properties that their clients may want to unload for
various reasons — death, divorce, inheritance, or change in investment
or goals, for example. Accountants prepare financial statements for their
clients who are about to sell their properties for different reasons. Here’s
a word of advice: It’s much easier getting deals from these two profes-
sionals if you’re a client yourself.
 Lenders: Most properties that a lender forecloses on are placed in a
foreclosure auction. If the auction isn’t successful, the property reverts
to the lender and becomes bank owned or, in more common terms, a
real estate owned property (an REO property). At this point, you can
attempt to purchase the property from the bank. The purchase will be
“as-is,” so do your homework. Contact your lender and talk to someone
in its REO department to find out more about their purchase procedures.
In some markets, you’ll see REOs listed at market price levels. But you
want a bargain, right? You should take your chances and wait for a
better price. The REO property isn’t an asset to the bank; it’s a liability
and has costs associated with it, such as paying a management com-
pany, property taxes, and hazard insurance. Our suggestion is to be
patient, even if your offer was rejected. Let the property and its high
costs simmer in the bank’s portfolio for a while. Pretty soon, we bet the
bank will be willing to listen to your offer.
Look where no one else is looking
You can also find commercial fixer-uppers by not following the crowd. By the
time you get to where everyone else has either read about or visited, you’re
probably too late. Move away from the herd. Look for fixer-uppers in places
that make your investor friends say, “Where in the world is that? I’ve never
even heard of that city?” Be a trailblazer. Be an original. There’s a handsome
reward awaiting you.
248 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Where to buy
Just like every other type of real estate, you can choose where to buy, depend-
ing on your investment goals and means. As your search narrows and you
begin to focus, you want to choose the right neighborhood. You have the fol-
lowing four choices, and each has unique pros and cons that you need to pay
attention to:
 Bad part of town: Investing in commercial fixer-uppers in this neck of
the woods is riskiest. Prices are the cheapest here, and there’s a reason
for that. The relative costs to complete the rehab process are roughly
the same in each neighborhood, but you have to think about some big
questions: Where is the neighborhood headed? Is it in the recovery
cycle, or the down-and-out cycle? If you do manage to fix up the prop-
erty, will it be desirable to tenants? If you can catch the neighborhood
on the upswing, buy at a good price, successfully fix up the property,
and lease it, this may be your home run!
 Lower-middle class: This is where most of the successes happen for
apartment complex fixer-uppers. In these neighborhoods, lower-income
tenants abound. And because it’s too costly to construct new apartments
for them to occupy, and they can’t afford rents on a newly built property,
you don’t have to worry about losing your tenant base. They’ll always
be there waiting for the spiffy, remodeled, and fixed-up complex. This is
where we consistently see the biggest dollars made.
 Suburbs: This is the middle of the road because it’s less risky than the
previous two. More than likely, your return on investment will be a little
lower because of the higher entry prices, but that may be okay with
more conservative folks. The one thing you can count on here is stability
because the real estate cycle swings are less volatile.
 Downtown: Fixer-uppers here can be very lucrative if you know what
you’re doing. The majority of opportunities here involve office buildings
and mixed-use properties. Mixed-use properties are buildings that con-
tain residential and retail or residential and office space. Typically, you
need deeper pockets here because of the size of the projects. We’ve seen
tons of money made here when investors changed the property’s use to
something that the downtown needed more of. For example, does that
particular area need more retail centers and restaurants?
Taking action before those great
opportunities disappear
Peter Harris’s mentor taught him a lot about business, but one thing Peter
couldn’t anticipate was the importance of anticipating his needs and skills.
He truly believes that you need to go through an entire transaction from start
249Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
to finish to completely and honestly appreciate the process. Here are the
needs and skills you need to anticipate through the process:
 Your management skills: This is first on the list because it’s the most
important. Management has two levels:
• Project management involves managing the overall rehabilitation
of the property.
• Property management involves managing the operations such as
leasing, maintenance, accounting, marketing, and so on.
If you don’t have these skills, we urge you to find a partner who has
them or hire a professional property management company.
 Your availability: How much time can you honestly devote to your first
fixer-upper project? Is most of your daytime taken up by a full-time job?
Is investing in commercial fixer-uppers going to be a part-time job for
you? If so, can you afford to hire out the things you can’t do? Set realistic
time commitments and budget in the hired help. Do the numbers still
pan out?
 Your sweat factor: Investing in fixer-uppers pays off hugely if done effi-
ciently and smartly, but it involves hard work and risk taking. Are you
willing to go the extra mile and put in a full day’s work on minor details?
Do you have the fortitude to hold your position when things don’t go
just right? You’re going to reap the rewards of what efforts you sow in
every project you take on.
 Your financial firepower: Do you have the means to go to a lender and
get construction financing for the project? Do you have private money
resources to get money quickly? Do you have cash readily available to
get the ball rolling on a project? What is your cash position?
 Your personality: Who are you? Are you the type who can deal with ten-
ants and contractors one on one? Are you a number-crunching, spread-
sheet junkie, or are you the smooth-talking relationship guy? Do what
you do best and either partner with or hire out the rest if you can afford
it. Focus on your strengths.
 Your goals: Set realistic goals and timelines that everyone involved
agrees with. A surefire way to start off on the wrong foot is to assume
that you’re in agreement with your partners or contractors when you’re
not. In the fixer-upper business, one thing is tied to another, so delays in
one area can affect the entire project.
 Your exit strategy: When you come up with your plan on how to profit
from this project, make sure that your real estate agent nods his head
“yes” when you ask him if he thinks you’ll be able to sell the property for
a certain amount. Also, if your plan is to refinance the property, ask your
lender the following question: “So, Terry, in order for me to refinance
this property in _____ years, where do the financials have to be in order
for me to refinance out _____ dollars?”
250 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Figuring Out What a
Fixer-Upper Is Worth
As we’ve said before, the name of the game is to buy smart and low, fix up,
lease up, and sell high. But a couple of questions always come up. What’s
considered low, and how do I figure out how much the property is worth
before I fix it up? And how high can I sell it for, and who sets the price?
Here we start with how to figure out the worth of a commercial fixer-upper.
Valuing a single-family home fixer-upper and a commercial fixer-upper is
much different. A single-family home fixer-upper is valued on what similar
homes in the same market have recently sold for. That’s it. But a commercial
fixer-upper is valued on how much income it brings in yearly. That’s priority
number one. Priority number two is what similar commercial properties in
the same market have recently sold for. In a nutshell, commercial properties
are valued on their income and location.
Determining your cash flow
Say you own a 2-story, 20-unit apartment building, and you’ve collected the
rent from your tenants for the month. This is your gross income. Now, you
have to pay normal property expenses such as property taxes, hazard insur-
ance, maintenance, repairs, water, electricity, and trash. These are your oper-
ating expenses.
After you subtract your expenses from your income, what’s left over is called
your net operating income (NOI). And from the net operating income, you pay
the mortgage. After the mortgage is paid, what remains is your cash flow. That
wasn’t too difficult, right? Cash flow should be one of your main goals in max-
imizing the value of the fixer-upper after it’s fixed up and leased. Generally
speaking, the higher the cash flow, the higher the value. Check out Table 14-1
for a quick example.
Table 14-1 20-Unit Apartment Building Analysis:
What Is This Property Worth?
Description
Monthly
Yearly
Gross income (rents) $6,000 $72,000
Operating expenses $2,400 $28,800
Net operating income (NOI) $3,600 $43,200
(continued)
251Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
Table 14-1
(continued)
Description
Monthly
Yearly
Mortgage payment $2,000 $24,000
Cash flow $1,600 $19,200
Figuring your NOI, cap
rate, and sales price
Commercial properties are valued by their income and location. As for the
income, you want to pay special attention to the NOI, which determines a
commercial property’s value. The NOI is simply the gross income minus the
operating expenses. Please note that mortgage payments are not included
in the NOI.
Another term you need to understand in valuing commercial properties is
capitalization rate. The cap rate, as it’s often called, is the return on your
cash investment as if you had paid cash for the property. Cap rate measures
a property’s performance without considering the mortgage financing. If you
had paid cash for the investment, how much money would it be making?
What’s the return?
The equation for cap rate is NOI divided by the sales price. See the following
formula:
Cap rate % = (NOI ÷ sales price) × 100
Cap rates vary not only from state to state or city to city, but also from market
to market. The real estate industry uses cap rates in different ways. Here
are two:
 A high cap rate (typically 8 percent and higher) usually typifies a higher-
risk investment, higher potential returns, and a low sales price. High
cap rate investments are typically found in low-income areas.
 A low cap rate (7 percent and below) usually typifies a lower-risk invest-
ment, lower potential returns, and a high sales price. Low cap rates are
typically found in middle-class to upper-income areas.
Markets within cities are assigned cap rates. For example, the nice part of
town may have a going cap rate of 6 percent (because prices are relatively
high), but in the bad part of town, the going cap rate may be as high as 10
percent (because prices are relatively low).
252 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
You can find out what cap rates run in your market by asking a knowledge-
able and experienced local commercial broker, commercial lender, or com-
mercial appraiser.
If you know a property’s NOI, and you know the typical cap rate for your
market, you can calculate what the sales price of the property should be
when you’re ready to sell the property and walk away with a tidy sum of
cash. Here is the equation for it:
Sales price = (NOI ÷ cap rate) × 100
For the example in Table 14-1, you can calculate what the property is worth.
For instance, say that we asked a commercial broker and an appraiser what
the going cap rate was for the market; they told us 8 percent. Use the previ-
ous equation to figure out the property’s worth:
Sales price = ($43,200 ÷ 8%) = $540,000
Therefore, based on the given market cap rate and the NOI, the property is
worth $540,000.
After you know what the property is worth, your next step is to find out what
similar properties have sold for in the area in the last 12 months. That way
you can make sure the sales price you calculated ($540,000 in this case) isn’t
too far off.
Running the numbers on
an example property
To help you better understand the numbers game when determining how
much a commercial property is worth, we’re going to walk you through a real-
world example by using Cool Heights Village, a 120-unit apartment community.
Cool Heights is located in a middle-class neighborhood, about 2 blocks from
downtown and about 3 blocks from the town’s mall. The new owner, Abe,
bought it from a family who had owned it for 17 years. When Abe bought the
family-managed property, it was in poor physical condition and, for the last
four years, had never achieved better than 75 percent tenant occupancy. The
property looked run down. There were two other apartment complexes in the
area; one was slightly larger and one slightly smaller, and both were about a
half-mile east. Both properties were nearly 100 percent occupied and in decent
condition. Abe bought Cool Heights with the intention of fixing it up, getting
the occupancy up to the market level, and then selling it.
253Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
Abe confirmed that the other two complexes also were recent purchases. The
purchase price for both of those properties averaged $37,000 per apartment
unit. Abe paid $3 million for Cool Heights, or $25,000 per unit. Abe planned
to put the complex back on the market at around $37,000 per unit when the
property’s rehabilitation was complete. After 12 months of hard work, the
rehab was complete ($260,000 worth), and the property’s occupancy had
hovered around 96 percent for the last 3 or so months. Thanks to the improve-
ments, Abe increased the rents of each apartment by $25. He also cut operat-
ing expenses by getting new insurance and hiring higher-skilled maintenance
people. Take a look at the before and after scenarios shown in Table 14-2.
Table 14-2 Cool Heights Before and After Fix-Up
Cool Heights
Cool Heights
Before Fix-Up
After Fix-Up
Monthly Yearly Monthly Yearly
Potential rental $50,400 @ $420 $604,800 $53,400 @ $445 $640,800
income each unit each unit
Actual rental $37,800 (75% $453,600 $51,264 (96% $615,168
income occupied) occupied)
Operating $27,500 $330,000 $22,864 $274,368
expenses
Net operating $10,300 $123,600 $28,400 $340,800
income (NOI)
When Abe was ready to sell the apartment complex, he found out what the
going cap rate was for the area, which was 8 percent. Then Abe found two
comparable and recent property sales to measure his property with. Here
are the numbers:
Market cap: 8 percent
Value at 8 percent cap: $4,260,000
Cool Heights was put on the market by a local real estate agent, and it sold
within three months for $4.26 million, or $35,500 per unit. Abe’s profit was
$1.26 million before subtracting costs of $260,000 for fixing up the property.
So in the end, Abe profited $1 million for his efforts. Cool Heights turned into
a cool deal.
Profits at sale (before costs of fix-up): $4,260,000 (sales price) – $3,000,000
(payoff of loan) = $1,260,000 – $260,000 = $1,000,000.
254 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Mapping Out a Fixer-Upper Game Plan
For us, figuring out whether we can turn a profit with our fixer-upper is the
most exciting part of the process. We see if we’re likely to make a whole lot of
money, a little bit of money, or if we need to pass on the deal. Mapping out a
game plan involves knowing your comfort zone, selecting an area, choosing a
property type, doing due diligence, understanding the financing options
available, and most important, knowing how to get the profits out of your
property.
You need to check four factors when considering a commercial fixer-upper.
Because each factor affects the others, give some serious thought to the
viability of the project if one factor is deficient. Here they are:
 Speculation factor must be low: One of the most dangerous things you
can do when investing in fixer-uppers is to speculate. Don’t invest in a
fixer-upper where the majority of your profits depends on your specula-
tion of falling cap rates or yearly appreciation. This is a cash-flow business
where appreciation is a bonus only. If you get it, great. If you don’t, no part
of your exit strategy changes. Don’t roll the dice. Commercial properties
are valued on the ability to produce income. More income means higher
value. Therefore, do your evaluation based on today’s cap rates.
 Location factor needs to be sound: Ask yourself, “If this property were
in a different location, would it have been successful?” If yes, what would
those ideal location characteristics be? Now, take those characteristics,
and ask yourself, “Can I neutralize those needed characteristics by modi-
fying the property, or can I see those favorable characteristics taking
place in the neighborhood today?” Location is critical to your timing of
the purchase and sale. You can make tons of money fixing up shopping
centers if you understand that location is the most important factor in
maximizing value. You can fix a shopping center, but you can’t fix a
location.
 Physical condition factor: The property must be physically sound. If it
has extensive defects or shortcomings, the project may be financially
unfeasible. Defects may include structural foundation, electrical, or
plumbing issues, just to name a few. Take on a project within your com-
fort zone. If your prior projects involved new paint, new sheetrock, and
new appliances, think twice about taking on projects involving replacing
a foundation on a vacant property. These are two different animals, and
two different skill sets are needed. Creative solutions to physical prob-
lems can create huge profits.
 Owner readiness factor: The owner must be ready to sell. He must
admit his best solution today is to remove this property and its prob-
lems from his portfolio. To help in his decision, come up with a few good
and compelling reasons for the owner to sell.
255Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
Does your prospective commercial fixer-upper favorably satisfy these fac-
tors? If so, you’re ready to move on to the next level: due diligence. If not,
consider finding another deal for now.
Perform due diligence
Due diligence is the process of doing your homework on a potential invest-
ment. You’re looking to find out whether it’s a good buy, an average buy, or
a bad buy. Because we have dedicated Chapter 6 to the subject of due dili-
gence, we recommend that you review it again.
Due diligence is not only a fact-gathering mission, but it is also a mind-set.
You must think like an investigator on one of those detective television
shows. Leave no stone unturned. Expect the unexpected. Expect drama.
Expect the twist in the story. The one thing you want to avoid is a surprise
ending, right?
A proper mind-set also means being “present” with what’s going on around
you. You need to be as distraction free as possible when going through the
due diligence process. What are the consequences of being distracted during
due diligence? Not good, that’s for sure. Not being present may cause you to
overlook important property expenses or not follow up on a severe physical
defect in the property’s structure.
The due diligence process usually has three areas of focus: physical inspec-
tion, financial investigation, and legal inquiries. In the following sections, we
touch on these topics as they pertain to commercial fixer-uppers, but we add
another area: sales and marketing strategies, which are often overlooked.
Physical inspection
Hire a professional property inspector to do the physical inspection. These
professionals are trained to spot apparent and potential problems. They’ll get
on the roof, check out the building’s foundation, walk through every unit of
occupyable space, including storage and garage areas and laundry facilities,
check for building code violations, and see if the electrical and plumbing sys-
tems are up-to-date.
Keep in mind that during a physical inspection, your goal is to take note of
every broken piece of the property that’s going to need fixing. For example,
jot down if there is evidence of a roof leak or if a section of the sidewalk is a
safety hazard and needs replacing. Remember, your goal is to buy at a good
price, fix it up, lease up, and sell. Knowing how much the fix-up is going to
cost is a major piece of the puzzle. After you have your list of items that need
fixing, you’re in a position to add everything up to see if the costs outweigh
the benefits of buying.
256 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
During the inspection, it’s a good idea to have your roofer and general con-
tractor there, walking around with the property inspector. An inspector will
give his best guess on what it will cost to have a roof replaced or what it will
cost to have siding replaced. With the roofer and general contractor there,
you can get more accurate costs immediately.
Although a professional property inspector can give you the overall picture
of the property’s condition, you should consider bringing in a specialist if the
inspector’s report turns up a potential problem that’s beyond his experience.
Financial investigation
You’ll run into different financial scenarios with a fixer-upper than you would
if you were buying a normal, ready-to-take-over commercial property. First of
all, because the property is distressed, the financial records will show it.
Typically, the income is much lower than its potential, and the expenses are
higher than normal, proportionally. Don’t be surprised. Second, expect the
financial records to be incomplete, nonexistent, and maybe really unprofes-
sional looking. This is why it’s a fixer-upper. This is where you make your
profits.
When you do your financial investigation, crunch the numbers as-is by evalu-
ating the cash flow of the property in its current condition. Of course, you’ll
see a horrible, negative cash-flow condition. Make a note of that negative
cash-flow number. Now crunch the numbers as if the property is fixed up and
90 percent occupied or at market occupancy with great tenants. What does
the cash flow look like? Hopefully it’s great. Make a note of that positive cash-
flow number. See the big difference between the two? Now, you have to ask
yourself these questions:
 How do I go from that huge negative number to that great positive
number?
 How do I bridge the gap? Is it attainable?
 How long will it take and how much will it cost?
All of these issues are discussed later in the chapter.
Legal inquiries
Everything that you read about “legal” due diligence in Chapter 6 applies here.
However, with fixer-uppers, you need to look at a few things a little more
closely. First, because the property is distressed, we would be concerned
about liens from contractors, subcontractors, workers, and materials suppli-
ers. Make sure that your purchase contract agreement states that the seller
is responsible for clearing up all liens placed against the property before
closing occurs. Also pay close attention to building code violations. Because
257Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
the property is distressed, what corners did the owner or management cut?
Last, but not least, pay extra attention to the insurance policy, and obtain a
claims history report. You’ll find out about things such as past fires, past
water-damage claims, and prior tenant claims.
Sales and marketing strategy
Part of your due diligence is to come up with a sales and marketing plan to
lease your spiffy new property with great tenants and great leases as quickly
as possible. Just as any new forward-looking, successful business has a busi-
ness plan, your project needs one too. This part of due diligence is often
overlooked because the person managing the update has his hands full with
those challenges. And most great project managers don’t have a salesperson’s
mentality. They’re usually very analytical, but not the salesperson you need
to have on the team.
If you’re creating a plan for a retail center, start off by asking these questions:
 How are other retail centers doing in this area?
 Is the population trend upward or downward?
 Is there job growth in the city?
Do enough research to solidly quantify any trends that you discover. Next
research and find out if there will be a strong market for your fixer-upper
after you finish. Will your finished product be in demand? Do this work
upfront. Then figure out the most effective ways of marketing your completed
fixer-upper. Implementing a strong plan with the right salespeople on the
front lines makes all the difference. For more help on this topic, check out
Marketing For Dummies, 2nd Edition, by Alexander Haim (Wiley).
Before fix-up and after: Bridging
the gap to payday
After your due diligence is complete, you have to make a decision. Do I pull
the trigger on this deal? Your due diligence holds the answers to some key
questions: Can I take this property in its “before” condition and transform it
into its desired “after” condition? Can I do it profitably and within a reason-
able time frame? In other words, do I have the skill, know-how, and resources
to take this mess of a property, this great opportunity, and cross the bridge
to a property that attracts the best tenants, gets good lease rates, improves
the area, and makes me money? Here are tips for bridging that gap:
 Know your break-even point. Know how much income you need to bring
in to break even after paying operating expenses and the mortgage. Get
to this point as quickly as possible. (We discuss breaking even in detail
later in the chapter.)
258 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
 Find out the cause of the distress. Find the root causes of how the prop-
erty got into trouble. Property problems go two to three levels deep. For
example, if the property’s distress is blamed on a weak rental market
(level 1), it’s probably because the owner is marketing to the wrong type
of tenants (level 2). The owner may be misdirecting her marketing
because she’s out of tune with what’s happening in the market today
(level 3). As you can see, each level has a root cause (as well as a
solution).
 Rate the seriousness of each problem. After examining the causes of
the distress, prioritize each one on a scale from one to five, with five
being very serious. Immediately address the fives first, and then work
your way down.
 Total your financial needs. You need to figure out as best you can how
much money you need to purchase and fix up the property. Your total
should include any long- and short-term loans, including construction
loans, rehab loans, bridge loans, hard money loans, or lines of credit.
And as a safeguard, add a cash reserve.
 Figure out how long it will take to complete your game plan. Although
this may be difficult to pinpoint, sketch out as best as you can how long
it will take to acquire, fix up, and sell the property. Don’t just throw out
a number of months or years. Instead, make an educated guess. For
instance, if the purchase process takes 3 months, the fix-up takes 12
months, and positioning and selling takes 6 months, you’re talking almost
2 years for the project completion. The months can really add up quickly.
It’s best to be on the conservative side.
 Decide who’s going to do the work. Who’s on your team? You’ll have to
develop your team of professionals — general contractors, attorneys,
property managers, leasing agents, maintenance personnel, project man-
agers, accountants/bookkeepers, and various other folks.
Determining your break-even point
One of the first things we like to know before jumping into a deal is how
much income we need to bring in each month to at least break even in cash
flow. It’s stressful owning and managing negative cash-flow properties, so the
question is, where do you need to be occupancy-wise to at least break even?
You want to get to this condition as soon as possible. Getting to the break-
even point allows you to predictably turn the corner to positive cash flow
and profitability.
Here’s a quick and easy formula to use to figure out your break-even point:
259Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
1. Calculate your potential gross income.
Potential gross income is defined as the most income the property can
make when it’s 100 percent occupied. For example, if you have 60 apart-
ment units renting at $555 per month each, your potential gross income
is 60 × $555 or $33,300 per month. Now, multiply by 12 to get the annual
total, which is approximately $400,000.
2. Calculate your total operating expenses.
Add up all of your monthly expenses, including taxes, insurance, mainte-
nance, repairs, utilities, landscaping, accounting, management fees,
salaries, and so on. Then multiply that number by 12 to get your annual
total.
3. Calculate your total mortgage payments for 12 months.
This is called this your annual debt service.
You can use this formula to find your break-even point:
Break-even occupancy % point = (operating expenses + annual debt ser-
vice) ÷ potential gross income × 100
Here’s a quick example: Suppose the fixer-upper is currently 50 percent occu-
pied. Say at 100 percent occupancy, the property brings in $400,000, and the
operating expenses run you $185,000. The annual debt service is $95,000. See
the break-even point calculation below:
Break-even occupancy % point = ($185,000 + $95,000) ÷ $400,000 ×
100 = 70%
This means that when the property reaches 70 percent occupancy, it will break
even. Below 70 percent occupancy, the property will operate in negative cash
flow. Any occupancy above 70 percent will produce positive cash flow.
In this example, the property is currently 50 percent occupied. After it reaches
70 percent occupancy, it will have a positive cash flow. Given these numbers,
you need to ask yourself these questions: How long will it take to reach a 70
percent occupancy break-even point? And can I support the property finan-
cially until it reaches 70 percent occupancy?
Creating checkpoints for
the renovation process
It’s a given that when you purchase a fixer-upper you’ll have to do some work
on it, and for that, it’s best to have timely checkpoints. Start your checkpoints
by identifying the main pieces of the fix-up puzzle: financial, rehabilitation,
property management, and lease-up.
260 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
You need to think about many questions and tasks to establish checkpoints
for your commercial fixer-upper project. What follows are the various check-
points to consider for putting together each piece of the timeline puzzle.
Financial checkpoints
You need to answer three questions to come up with a financial timeline.
If you have all the necessary funds to fix up the property, you’re all set.
But if you need to obtain the money from other sources, such as a lender
or investor, you need to plan accordingly. Ask yourself these questions:
 How much do I want to profit and in what time period? You may have to
expand your rehab tasks and spend a little more to achieve a greater
profit.
 How much is it going to cost me to fix up the joint?
 How fast can I get a hold of the money I need?
Rehabilitation checkpoints
When planning the rehab work on the property, keep these points in mind:
 Identify the rehab items that will give you the highest rate of return
on your rehab dollar. Start on those first. For example, if all you need
to do is minor drywall work to make your downstairs office space lease
ready, and there is a ready market for that space, do that first.
Curb-appeal improvements provide the highest rate of return on your
rehab dollar. The easiest way to fix up and turn around a property is to
make it look “pretty.” It’s amazing what a little sprucing up at a retail
strip mall does to increase its occupancy and desirability. Before you
start implementing your ideas for marketing, do your most important
curb-appeal-type tasks. You can’t sell on promises. Rarely will a tenant
sign a lease because you verbally promise that the property will look
“pretty” within a few months.
 Set up a spending budget with enough detail to show how many tools
and supplies you plan on using. Include items like rags, towels, and
rolls of masking tape. You need to be that detailed. You may not know
exactly how many rolls of masking tape you’re going to need, but have
them in the budget. Simple cost overruns can turn huge in a heartbeat if
you don’t take every single line item into account. Be a penny pincher.
 Get your skilled helpers ready to get to work. Do they have their own
tools? Will materials and supplies be ready for them? Do you have
enough help to get the job done in the amount of time required? Have
you budgeted for a little extra just in case you need more help?
 Have a system of monitoring progress of the rehab work. We use pro-
ject management software. Many choices are available online.
261Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
Property management checkpoints
Keep these issues in mind when determining your property management
needs:
 Do you have extensive property management experience? If not, hire
someone who does. This is a critical part of the fix-up process. The
property manager makes sure that all the projects and the overall time-
line stay on track and checkpoints are checked off.
 Make sure that your means of reporting information or obtaining
information from the property is consistent and reliable. We use
Web-based property management software for all of our properties.
Information is available to us 24/7 with a touch of a keystroke. So at any-
time, we can find out about project accounting costs, budget monitoring,
profit and loss reports, payable and receivable reports, tenant informa-
tion, and maintenance status. Depending on the project, we create our
own spreadsheets by using a program such as Microsoft Excel. For more
expansive projects with multiple people and where sharing is involved,
we’ll use an online program such as Microsoft Groove.
 Put the focus on customer satisfaction. Keep in mind that the purpose
of fixing up the property is to attract paying tenants and keep them for
a long time. To measure customer satisfaction, look at the property’s
tenant turnover ratio. A turnover ratio of greater than 70 percent means
that 70 percent of your tenants are leaving within 12 months. Not good
for your bottom line. Chances are that they’re leaving because they
aren’t being served satisfactorily.
Lease-up checkpoints
When it’s time to starting leasing, consider these points:
 Be ready for the Saturday drive-by and visit. Put on a good first impres-
sion for the person who’s just driving by. Make sure the grounds are
clean and well landscaped, keep your signs and buildings painted, and
have convenient parking. It’s a lot easier to lease up your property if
you can get potential tenants to come through the front door or call the
number on the sign outside. We can’t overemphasize enough how impor-
tant it is to have the completed fixer-upper look dazzling from the
outside in.
 Set your marketing efforts to the type of tenants you want. Know who
you want as your tenants. Know their socioeconomic status, income,
and lifestyles. Then figure out where to find these people and focus your
marketing strategy there. If your newly renovated property is ripe for
doctor’s offices, forget about marketing in apartment rental guides. If
your newly renovated downtown office building is ready for lease-up,
consider hiring a leasing company that specializes in placing downtown
office tenants.
262 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
 Motivate your marketing and leasing staff with money. We routinely
give bonuses to our leasing agents as each new lease is signed. Rewarding
our leasing agents with a bonus equal to half of the first month’s rent
isn’t out of the question when we need to be really aggressive. Don’t be
cheap. Being cheap can be expensive!
 Check out the competition. When was the last time you went shopping?
No, not grocery shopping. When was the last time you went shopping to
peek at your competitor’s offering to the public? Before you lease one bit
of any space, make sure you perform lease and rent surveys of your com-
petition. In addition to finding out what they’re charging for rent, see if
they’re giving out incentives such as one month rent free or a reduced
lease rate if the tenant signs a longer lease. What amenities do your com-
petitors have that you don’t? Being a shopaholic is encouraged here!
Avoiding Headaches and Pitfalls (Or
at Least Minimizing the Pain)
Experience is the best remedy for the headaches of taking on a commercial
fixer-upper. We wish we would have had a book like this to lay out the
groundwork for us when we first started. We’ve heard that mentoring means
getting wisdom without the pain. In an effort to offer you some mentoring,
here are a few nuggets about how to avoid common pitfalls (yes, ones we’ve
experienced ourselves). We also include some tips for hiring out your
headaches — oops, we mean projects.
Recognize hopeless situations
Not every commercial fixer-upper can be fixed. That’s right. Some deals out
there are just too far gone to make a profit from. Sometimes you can spot
them upfront, but most times you’ll have to go through some due diligence to
really find out. Here are a few signs and situations that tell you that your
prospective fixer-upper deal is hopeless and you should move on to the next
opportunity.
Avoid obsolete properties
In commercial real estate, properties can be deemed obsolete in three ways.
When the property is obsolete, it can be very difficult and very expensive —
and sometimes impossible — to make right. An enormous loss of real value
can occur if a property becomes obsolete. Here are the ways in which a prop-
erty can be obsolete:
263Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
 Physically: This is a loss of value due to Mother Nature and old age. Or
the property is just plain worn out. Physical deterioration is another
name for it. A property with a foundation made out of crumbling bricks
and located in an earthquake zone is a good example.
 Functionally: In this category, a property can’t be used or it loses value
because of its poor design or lack of modern facilities. An example
would be a warehouse that doesn’t have enough electrical power to
accommodate today’s advanced electronics and circuitry.
 Economically: Here a property loses its value because of external forces,
such as a change in zoning or changes in traffic flow. A good example
would be having an airport or freeway constructed too close to your
property. Another great example could be the loss of a major employer
in your immediate area.
Avoid an owner who doesn’t want to play
If the owner isn’t serious about selling or isn’t willing to be reasonable, don’t
fool around. Move on to the next opportunity. Maybe give the reluctant owner
a call 30 days from now to see if his motivation has changed.
Avoid properties that have too much debt
We have seen properties that have been refinanced many times and now
have huge mortgage balances on them. The large mortgage payments have
sucked the cash flow from the properties and now the owner wants to sell.
But here’s the problem: The amount we’re willing to pay for the property is
lower than what is owed on the property. Unless the owner can do a “debt
workout” with the lender, we’re passing.
Avoid buying properties with bargain-bottom prices
Don’t invest in an area experiencing a downturn. The price is low for a reason,
especially in areas where the economy is declining. Because typical real estate
cycles run on ten-year curves, you may have to wait for ten years for a turn-
around or peak, if one happens at all.
Hire good contractors (and think like
one when you do projects yourself)
Contractors make a living by estimating the costs of a project, adding extra to
it for profit, and then doing the work. As a commercial fixer-upper investor,
you should think the same way. When a contractor takes too long to finish
a job, he’ll start “running in the red,” meaning that he’s no longer making a
profit. When you take too long to complete a fixer-upper, you can easily wipe
out your profits.
264 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
When you’ve done all the right things — bought low, fixed up under budget,
and improved the financial situation — don’t hesitate to get out. Don’t wait
around for new challenges and problems — they’ll cost you your profits.
Sell as quickly as possible. Think like a contractor: get in, do good work, and
get paid.
As for hiring a contractor for your commercial fixer-upper, it’s different than
hiring someone to remodel your home’s kitchen. Commercial real estate
investing is a business, so you need to think like a highly skilled and profes-
sional businessperson.
We may sound like a broken record, but treat your commercial real estate
business like a business and hire only the best and most cost-effective people
or companies of the highest integrity. Don’t take any shortcuts and never
compromise. Your future will thank you for it.
Be leery of contractors who ask you to make payments in their personal name,
ask for cash only, or want large payments upfront. All of these are red flags, and
they indicate that the contractor’s license may have been revoked or sus-
pended, that his insurance is cancelled, or that he’s having financial problems.
265Chapter 14: Making a Success Out of Commercial Fixer-Uppers
Why commercial fixer-uppers
will be around forever
Want a career with never-ending possibilities
and an endless flow of money-making deals?
Commercial fixer-uppers will always be around
as long as real estate exists. The real estate
cycle continuously creates distressed proper-
ties and distressed owners. At the peak of the
cycle, where you have seller’s market condi-
tions such as high price and low inventory, you
find buyers who have gotten in over their heads
because of over-enthusiasm and lack of experi-
ence. Within a few years (sometime less) of
owning the property, these owners want out at
all costs because of distress. So here’s your
start of the fixer-upper opportunities.
At the bottom of the cycle are buyer’s market
conditions. High inventories and low prices are
signs of the times. In this market, you have
countless opportunities. Somewhere in the
world, a buyer’s market always exists.
We see quite a bit of “uneducated” money
chasing after the same properties a seasoned
and experienced investor would. The unedu-
cated investors end up paying too much and
buying with unrealistic investment goals. This
results in two things: First, prices get inflated.
Second, these same owners become owners of
distressed properties over time because they’re
in over their heads. Do you see the cycle?
For those of you who want to invest in commer-
cial fixer-uppers, more money is available to you
than ever before in the history of real estate
investing. Lenders want to lend you money to fix
up commercial properties that will enhance
an area or city. Every time you fix up a property,
you add jobs to the city and increase the tax
revenues.
Timing Your Fixer-Upper for a Quick Sale
You’ve transformed your fixer-upper into a profitable, respectable place, and
now you’re ready to cash in on all of your hard work. Planning well plus effi-
cient management equals a handsome payday for you. It’s time to pat your-
self on the back and celebrate. Payday is around the corner!
But first things first — how do you know it’s time to sell? Well, you went into
this project with certain goals to meet, and you told yourself you’d sell after
they were met, right? Realistically, when the property reaches its maximum
potential, you want to sell at the top.
Getting emotionally tied to a project not only delays your profits, but it can
erase them as well. Markets can change on a whim, the economy is ever
changing, and the consumer mentality is always in flux. Plan your profits.
Work for your profits. See your profits. Sell and get your profits.
Timing the sale just right isn’t rocket science. In fact, it’s pretty simple to
decide to sell:
 When you see the profits, it’s time to sell.
 When you’re ready for more growth — both businesswise and
personally — it’s time to sell. You may need the profits from the
sale to move into the next project. If your goal is to become a
bigger investor, it usually requires bigger money and bigger plans.
To figure out how much to ask for your revitalized property, see the “Figuring
your NOI, cap rate, and sales price” section earlier in the chapter.
266 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Chapter 15
Land Development: The Heart
of Commercial Real Estate
In This Chapter
 Identifying the pros and cons of investing in land
 Paying attention to your surrounding market
 Surveying the three Ps of successful investing
 Teaming up for your land development project
 Negotiating for extra closing time
 Dealing with zoning and approvals for your project
 Working with bureaucrats and making connections at city hall
Land development is a way to take a small amount of money and turn it
into a fortune. If you can see the vision, stay the course, and make
friends with plenty of city planners and other governmental types, you can
have a new and prosperous career in land development.
In this chapter, we take you on a winding journey through the ins and outs of
developing raw dirt into the property of your dreams. We show you where to
find land deals, how to deal with stubborn government bureaucrats (who you
need on your development team), how best to negotiate, and how to get your
deal approved.
The Pros and Cons of Investing in Land
Land development can be a wonderful thing, but it can also be quite challeng-
ing at times. In this section, we show you both sides.
The pros
When you take a 5-acre piece of raw land that’s worth a million dollars
(because of its location), and you change its use (better known as rezoning),
there’s a very good chance that the value of that raw land can go up 25 to
100 percent in value. If you know how to raise the funds by using private
investors (see Chapter 10), you buy the property and, in a couple of years,
depending on the community, you can double what you paid for it. Land can
be an incredibly profitable investment. Plus, you can do really big deals with-
out using much of your own money. All you need is desire, determination,
and guts.
The cons
Here are some of the downsides of investing in land:
 As a beginning developer, you typically aren’t paid until the end of
the project. Of course, as in everything else, after you’ve established a
track record, getting paid for your services along the way is easier.
 Land development typically requires upfront money to cover the costs
of doing your due diligence, environmental studies, and/or a market
suitability report. For example, in a deal that our team members put
together recently, we put up almost $300,000 of investor money, set at a
high rate of return because they contributed fully at-risk money. If we
had decided not to do the deal, they could have lost it all.
 You have to gain the trust of people in the community, which can be
pretty tricky sometimes. Any one community governmental or neigh-
borhood association can put up a roadblock to the completion of your
land development project, so you have to be sure to make lots of
friends.
 With land development, you can make massive chunks of money, but
you can also lose money swiftly. For example, in one of our projects, we
didn’t foresee a huge problem with building in an existing community
that was almost complete. Specifically, 35 townhouse buildings had been
built; we were planning to build the last 5. The homeowner’s association
opposed our involvement, but we weren’t smart enough to see this
burning issue going into the deal. When all was said and done, we pulled
out and got our earnest money back, but we lost $37,000 in the soft costs
(fees paid for surveys, research, and inspections) that we had put into
the deal.
 With commercial real estate, your biggest concerns can be potential
environmental problems. When you’re buying land, you’re basically
buying dirt, and if that dirt has been raw for 200 years, there’s a chance
that somebody dumped oil or gas or fertilizer on it back in the 1930s or
268 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
1940s when no one thought or cared about it. Here’s the problem: If you
have contaminated dirt or other environmental problems, you need to
remedy all those problems as part of your land development project.
Even though environmental problems aren’t necessarily showstoppers,
they do add to your costs, so you definitely need to be aware of them.
Understanding What Makes
Land Worth More
Certain things can cause a land’s value to increase (or decrease if the situa-
tion isn’t right). Here are the three factors that affect value:
 Location: Land that’s close to where people live, work, and play is worth
more than land out in the middle of nowhere. You may have heard this
before — and with land development it’s absolutely essential. The most
valuable land is typically close to people — lots of people.
One of the best places to own land is “on the water.” The value of water-
front property continues to climb over time because that’s where people
want to live and play.
 The approval to build: The reason that land is developed is so that it
can generate more income. Land that’s used for farming brings in much
less income than land that has an office building or shopping center on
it. When you change the zoning or take a piece of land through the
approval process, it becomes more valuable simply because you now
have the ability to build and create more income from the land.
 Availability of utilities: In order for land to be improved, you need to
make sure that the water, electricity, gas, and sewer systems are avail-
able. Land that’s several miles away from these services will require you
to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars in additional costs to develop
the property. Because of this, land that’s next to existing utilities, or that
already has utilities in place, is worth much more.
Knowing Whether You’re
in the Right Market
When you’re looking for the right piece of land to develop, you need to pay
attention to what surrounds the piece of land that you’re interested in. For
instance, ask the following questions:
269Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate
 Is the area growing and population coming in?
 What kinds of residences or businesses are already in place?
 What are the demographics of the area?
 If you intend to build a commercial enterprise, is there plenty of housing
or apartments going into the area?
In other words, assess the local economy; it needs to be strong for you to
make the venture profitable. What you’re looking for is the right spot to put
up houses or build your retail shopping center. Of course, you wouldn’t just
buy a piece of land because you got a good price — unless you had a way to
support it. What happens if you put up 55 townhouses, but no one is around
to fill them? You may have just created a perfect situation for a foreclosure
property. And the last thing you want to do is build a negative, depleting
asset, so be extremely careful about both the surroundings and demograph-
ics of the piece of land you’re looking at.
One of our Commercial Mentoring Program coaches, Stephen, is building a
$45 million project in Winter Park, Colorado. He spent $15,000 to have an
independent comprehensive market study done to find out whether what his
team thought about the marketplace was indeed true. Stephen says, “I’d
rather spend $15,000 now than spend $45 million to realize we were wrong
because our egos got mixed into our calculations.” To watch Stephen as he
shares “How to Explode Your Net Worth with Land Development” go to www.
commercialquickstart.com.
270 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Changing zoning
Several of our Commercial Mentoring Program
students found a property that included some
office buildings, warehouses, and also about
900 acres of undeveloped land. They used our
agreements to get the property under contract
and worked hard to review all the due diligence
that was needed to purchase a mixed-use prop-
erty like this.
They were able to put together a presentation
that convinced a group of friends they had met
at one of our trainings to provide the funds
needed for the deal. Their exit strategy is to sell
off the office buildings and warehouses but to
keep the land. If the contract that’s in place right
now closes, they’ll have made enough money
from selling the pieces with the buildings on it
to pay off all the investors and the remaining 900
acres of land.
Because it’s zoned agricultural and is just
beyond the edge of a large growing metropoli-
tan area, this land is worth about $2 per square
foot. This means that within the next five to ten
years, this land will become more and more
valuable. When the zoning is changed on this
land to allow residential development, the value
goes from $2 per square foot up to about $7 per
square foot. This works out to a huge profit.
Are you starting to see the potential in land
development?
Getting an outside expert’s opinion
No matter how good you think your land development project is, always get
an outside expert opinion. Every land developer that we know has either a
mentor or a close-knit group of experienced friends who can provide that out-
side, third-party viewpoint. Check out www.commercialmentoring.com to
find people to help with your project.
Recently, one of our team members hired an outside company to do a market
study on the town he was considering investing in. The company flew into
town, interviewed all kinds of people, and sent back a 122-page market study.
The study validated everything that our team member was thinking about the
market — that it was, indeed, a great time to invest. This information boosted
not only his own confidence, but also the confidence of the investors he was
bringing in to fund the project.
Examining the path of progress
If you were to look back at the history of most cities, you’d find that many of
them started off as small encampments along riverbanks or other convenient
places for people to gather and live. As a town grows over time, it spreads
farther and farther away from this central area. If you look at any town or
metropolitan area, you can see which direction the city has grown and which
direction it’s most likely to continue growing in.
When you buy land outside the city limits, you’re investing in the path of
progress. As the city continues to grow, your land will become more and
more desirable as other projects and developments move out toward your
property.
271Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate
Taking advantage of zoning acres
Commercial real estate brokers talk about an
acre as typically being 43,560 square feet, so if
you were to purchase a 40-acre lot, you’d have
a total of 1,742,400 square feet (40 × 43,560).
However, when you’re talking to the planning
department in an area where this land is
located, check the list of definitions they use to
see the number of square feet in an acre. You’d
think that it would be the same 43,560 square
feet as commercial brokers use. But you may
discover something called a
zoning acre. To
keep things simple, many municipalities define
a zoning acre as having a nice even 40,000
square feet. That means if you’re subdividing
your 40 broker-talk acres into house lots that are
each 1 zoning acre in size, you’ll end up being
able to sell 43.5 lots. Using this tip, you just
picked up an extra 3 1 ⁄ 2 acres of land for free.
How’s that for a return on your investment?
Many cities have an outer development boundary that’s drawn on the plan-
ning maps. This boundary is outside the city line, and it defines the areas in
which the city expects to be developed over time. Ask your planning depart-
ment where you can find out more about this.
Identifying the Three Ps for
Successful Projects
If you want to be successful in your land development project, you need to
follow what we call “the 3 Ps.” Here they are:
 Position: What’s your position in the marketplace? Is there a demand for
the type of development that you’re contemplating? You can have the
best project in the world, with the fanciest architecture, and many more
people than your mom can love it. However, if you can’t sell it over time,
you’ll make a mistake buying it in the first place.
 Profits: What profits is the land likely to make? This includes making a
great return on your time, energy, and personal capital that you con-
tribute to the project. In addition to money in your pocket, most good-
sized land development projects end up using bank financing, private
investors, or a combination of the two. Banks want your project to be
profitable so that they can get paid. Your investors want not only to
be paid back, but also to get a high rate of return.
 Politics: What does politics have to do with land development? Every-
thing. Why? Because before you break ground to build something, you
need the approval of several different governmental entities, including
the city council, the planning commission, the zoning department, and
several other bureaucratic departments that you may not even think
about — like the neighbors, the homeowner’s association, and even
the U.S. Postal Service.
Mess up in just one area here and your land development project could be
delayed, denied, or defunct. This is why you need to be good at making
friends fast in high places when you do land development.
To be successful, it’s also important to know your exit strategy before you get
in. Typically for land development, your exit strategy is to sell to another
builder. Or you may decide to get the right land in the path of progress and
wait for the other developers to work their way out to you. Before you jump
in, however, make sure that you understand what you’ll eventually do with
the property. You can sell to another builder, hire a builder and manage the
project, or build it yourself.
272 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Investing in Land with a Team
Yes, we understand that it’s difficult to invest in land on your own, which is a
key reason why our commercial investing trainings keep getting bigger and
bigger. Our Commercial Mentoring Program students return not only to
refresh their knowledge and get little nuggets of new information, but also
to rekindle relationships and meet other students. We’ve seen many of these
relationships turn into joint ventures over time.
With a big land development project, it makes sense to have a number of
people on your team. When you’re picking the right people, recruit those
who have different talents and characteristics than you do. For example, it
doesn’t make sense to recruit only detail-oriented people and no one who’s
able to see the big picture. (See Chapter 10 for more on creating partner-
ships.) Here’s a list of the people that you want on your team:
 Civil engineer
 Commercial broker
 Geologist
 Homebuilder
 Landscaping architect
 Marketing consultant
 Mentor or coach
 Project manager
 Real estate attorney
 Structural architect
 Surveyor
 Tax attorney
 Tax strategist and/or certified public accountant
Picking the right experts to work with is essential. When you don’t have the
right people on the team, it can be a painful learning experience. But we also
recognize we wouldn’t be where we are today if we didn’t have those experi-
ences. For more information on land development consultants in your area,
visit www.commercialmentoring.com.
We’ve found a little tool, the Kolbe Index (www.kolbe.com), that’s helpful for
determining within 20 minutes someone’s characteristics and talents. It tells
you if someone is good at starting things, following through on things, imple-
menting things, or taking care of details. It can help you choose the right
people to work with.
273Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate
Finding the Best Places to Invest in Land
One of the best places to develop land can often be right in town. Do you
know of any areas of open land that may be big enough for five to ten
houses? These are called infill projects.
Another good place to invest in land is in the direction in which the city is
expanding. For example, the Denver metropolitan area is bordered by moun-
tains in the west and mostly open space in the north. This leaves areas to the
east and the south as obvious places that will be developed over the next 10
to 20 years.
Denver is a good example of how a major transportation hub, such as an air-
port, can affect the path of progress. Denver International Airport was built
about 20 miles directly northeast of the then current city line. The city of
Denver annexed all that property. Because businesses and associated hous-
ing for workers is filling in the area around the airport, a major path of
progress lies between the city and the airport.
The path of progress is often determined early on in a city’s development and
continues for decades. So consider the path of progress points, combined
with job growth, migration, and new construction, when deciding whether
to pursue a project.
One way to reduce your risk with land development is to look for where other
big businesses are going in (which is usually in the path of progress). With
commercial properties, every other piece of land that’s developed helps to
attract more people to the area. When a big box store goes in, it’s much
more likely that other commercial projects are going to succeed. The more
people that go by your tenants’ stores, the more successful your tenants will
become — and successful tenants will make you rich. The trick here is to make
sure that you get into the game before all the other investors want to jump
onboard.
With Land, Time Really Does Equal Money
When you’re developing land or putting a project together, the more time you
have, the easier your job is and the more money you’ll typically make. The
reason for this is that extra time gives you the ability to
 Do more throughout due diligence to allow you to avoid potential pitfalls
 Go back and negotiate with the seller over time to get additional
concessions
 Research the marketplace to come up with more exit strategies
274 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
275Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate
You gotta know when to hold ’em
Rob, one of our Commercial Mentoring Program
coaches, used to work as a corporate warrior.
He traveled out of town every week from
Sunday night through Thursday. His marriage
was looking pretty shaky and his kids hardly
knew him. Rob read our book
Making Big
Money Investing in Real Estate without Tenants,
Banks, or Rehab Projects, and decided to quit
the corporate rat race and join our Residential
Mentoring Program. He began investing in
single-family houses and, over 18 months,
worked up to the point where he had almost 50
properties. Then Rob noticed that some of our
other students were getting involved in com-
mercial real estate. He had been happy up to
that point simply investing in single-family
homes.
Rob went to his father-in-law, David, who was a
commercial broker and said, “Pop, I want to do
what you do. Would you be willing to take
me under your wing?” Fast-forward two years.
Rob has found a 12-acre piece of land that
appears to be located in the path of progress.
Rob did some quick research and then had his
father-in-law and his other mentors check his
assumptions.
David told him, “It’s not a for-sure deal, but if
that area develops like I think it will, then that
land is going to be worth quite a bit more over
the next few years.” Using some of the creative
ideas from the Commercial Mentoring Program,
Rob effectively got the land under contract with
an agreement that he didn’t need to close for 12
months.
His plan was to control the property and sit back
to see what happened in the marketplace.
About eight months later a broker friend of Rob’s
came by the office. “Would you want to sell that
12-acre lot Rob? I can get you $500,000 more
than your purchase price. You can make a cool
half a million and never even have to own the
property.”
Although this sounded enticing, Rob told the
broker that he was going to think about it
overnight. He arranged to meet the broker for
lunch the next day. Rob went to his mentor at
this point to get his advice. His mentor said, “I
can see definite signs of development out there,
Rob. If it’s worth that much more today, just think
how much more it will be worth in a year or two.
Hang on to it if you can.”
The next day at lunch, Rob let the broker know
that he’d decided to keep his 12-acre lot rather
than sell it. The broker said, “That sounds like a
good decision on your part, Rob. “ He smiled
and said, “If I owned it, I wouldn’t sell it right
now either.”
Over the next month, Rob had 17 other people
approach him about buying his land. He couldn’t
get any of them to share with him what was
going on. All he knew was that something big
was going to happen. At the end of the year, Rob
brought in some other investors to help him close
on his contract to purchase the land. His price
worked out to $2 per square foot.
Several months later, Rob was sitting with his
wife and kids one morning when he saw an arti-
cle that caught his eye. The headline said
“Factory Outlet Mall Coming to El Paso.” Then
Rob realized that the mall was going to be right
across the street from his 12-acre lot! Rob and
his wife had been waiting for a big hit like this.
When we talked to Rob several weeks ago, he
said that other land nearby was selling for close
to $10 per square foot and that he had a number
of offers in the $9-per-square-foot range.
The lesson here is that it only takes one com-
mercial deal for you to be set for life. Rob and
his family stand to make several million dollars
on this one deal before it is over.
 Shop around with various lenders to get the best rates
 Find all the investors you need to fund the cash needs of the project
for you
 Allow local market activity to push the value of your land up
276 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Stretching the time you have to close
a deal: A real-life example
One of our clients, Roger, came across a prop-
erty that was owned by a national corporation
that had moved its offices and manufacturing
facilities to another area of the country. The
owner was annoyed at the time because
another investor had tied up the property for 11
months and then used an escape clause to get
out of the deal. Even though they were asking
$7.5 million for the property, this was a tiny little
thorn in their sides compared to everything else
the corporation had going on. At this point they
wanted to sell it and sell it quickly.
Roger went to the selling agent and asked a
very good question: “What’s a good offer going
to look like?” The agent said that it would prob-
ably take the full $7.5 million because there
were two other offers on the table. In addition,
the broker said that the seller wanted to close
in 60 days. Now, 60 days is about what it takes
to close a deal on a house. But on a big property
like this, it was highly likely that it would take
more time for Roger to check everything out and
line up his investors.
Roger said, “My offer is $7.6 million. Here’s
$100,000 earnest money and I’m okay with writ-
ing down the closing date as 60 days from now.”
Roger was smart enough to make sure that his
money didn’t become nonrefundable before the
60 days was up. He had two months to find a
way to figure out how to make this deal work.
Roger got busy at that point. He talked to his
partners and enlisted their help in moving
through the due diligence process. He also
found a way to connect not only with the selling
broker, but also with the people from the corpo-
ration who were in charge of the deal. He knew
that it was going to be next to impossible to
close within 60 days, so he started dropping
little hints that they may need some more time.
He ended up doing a number of other things to
stretch out the time to close this deal — things
like asking about a previous environmental
problem that had been completely taken care
of. But Roger said, “Well, obviously we need
some time to review that just to make sure it’s
all completely taken care of.” How could a
seller say no to that? Roger also used language
like “Gosh, these buildings are actually quite a
bit bigger than I thought — we’re going to need
an adequate amount of time to check out the
property, just as any other serious buyer
would.” By doing this, he was able to extend the
time to closing from 60 days all the way to 9
months.
And during those nine months, Roger was able
to find a bank that would loan him $5 million and
also line up investors who put in another $5 mil-
lion. This gave him a total of $10 million to work
with. He now had the money to cover the pay-
ments on the property during the next several
years in case he didn’t get it leased or sold right
away.
Roger says that he’s had several offers that are in
the $20 million range. And he has only owned the
property for about seven months. He doesn’t
want to sell it right now, because if he does he’s
going to have to pay short-term gains tax on his
$10 million profit.
The big picture is that all of this allows you to make more money and also
helps to reduce your stress levels.
Using contracts to get more time
When buying any type of commercial property, you’re going to need time to
check out the property, look at the title work, and line up any investors that
you may be using. One of the easiest ways to get more time is by using some
special language in your contracts.
One of our favorite approaches is to list a bunch of things that we need to see
as the buyer, such as a recent survey, all the title work, complete copies of
any environmental reviews, and so on. In the contract, you can ask for a cer-
tain number of business days after you receive all these items to complete
your due diligence. The clock doesn’t even start ticking until the seller
gets you all these items.
Another way to get more time is to ask for an extension upfront. You can say,
“We probably won’t need this, but in case we do, would it be okay if we had a
one-time extension of 60 days, just in case the lender has a delay or some
other minor problem comes up? We’d hate for the entire deal to fall through
due to some little detail like that.” When you get agreement on this, put it into
writing in the contract.
Here are two key points to remember for stretching out the time that you
may need on a deal:
 The connection and rapport that you have with the broker and seller is
absolutely critical.
 If you’re going to ask for an extension, don’t wait until the day before the
closing to bring it up. The worst thing you can do is go right to the end
of the time when they’re expecting that you’re ready to close and say,
“We can’t close. We need more time.”
Buying time with options
After you close on the purchase of the land, you have to pay real estate taxes
and costs on any mortgages you have until it can produce income to cover
these expenses. How can you buy time until you’re able to fully develop the
land?
Our favorite way to do this is by using options to control your ability to pur-
chase the property without actually having to make payments on it. An option
is a fee paid to the owner. That fee allows you to have the property under
277Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate
contract while you have time to move the development ahead. Your option
also gives you the time to do your due diligence and get approval from vari-
ous agencies.
Changing the Property’s Zoning and
Getting Approved to Develop
If you change a property’s zoning from something like an agricultural prop-
erty to mixed use or residential, its value can go up, often by a factor of ten.
The challenge is making sure you meet the community requirements
enforced by the local town, county, and/or state agencies.
Determining what to build on your land
When you look at a piece of land, what do you want to build on it? Do you
want to go commercial, such as strip centers or strip malls? Or do you want
to settle on single-family units or multiunits? When trying to decide what to
build on your land, be sure to look at the surrounding neighborhoods to see
how your project might fit in.
Just like other commercial real estate, the value of land is directly related to
the income it produces. This means that open agricultural land that’s good
for growing crops or grazing cows will be worth a lot less than a piece of land
on which a skyscraper has been built in the middle of a city.
Taking master plans into consideration
Most municipalities work off a master plan. A master plan (sometimes called
a comprehensive plan) states the community’s goals and objectives. It helps
to establish the rules and policies that relate to growth in the community,
including both new development and modifications to existing areas.
The master plan typically represents the opinions and suggestions for both
the community and governmental attitudes and goals. The suggestions in the
master plan are based on analysis of the local economy and demographic
studies, along with other factors that affect community. The master plan
attempts to provide a vision of what the community will look like as it
evolves over the next 5, 10, or 20 years.
In most places, a master plan is created as a way to provide direction, not
legally binding laws such as zoning regulations. In a few areas of the United
States, the master plan actually requires conformance, which gives it the
278 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
power of law. In most areas, however, the local bureaucrats and agencies do
their best to follow the master plan and meet the needs of their community. If
any of their decisions are questioned, those in line with the master plan are
most likely to be confirmed as correct.
For the people who live in an area of the master plan, the plan allows them to
know what to expect in terms of quality of life in that area. It identifies the
services people expect to get and helps create a common theme for the vari-
ous neighborhoods. Most people don’t like change. The master plan gives
people the certainty of knowing what can happen in an area. Ideally, this lets
them avoid any changes that can reduce their property values. The master
plan allows business owners to see the future locations of new areas for
employment or where residential communities may be located in order to
support workers who need to come and work in their business.
279Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate
How it took eight months to make a million
overnight
Leta, one of our students, purchased a mobile-
home park from owners who weren’t doing a
good job of managing the property. The park
was losing money because it was only half
occupied. She found a way to buy it “subject
to” the existing mortgage, which meant that
she could get in without using any of her own
money.
The park ended up taking up all of Leta’s time
and attention for the next eight months as she
worked hard to attract mobile-home owners
into the park. She even went out and bought
some used mobile homes just so that she could
get the rent for the lots. There were a number of
times when she came to us ready to quit.
After she finally had the mobile-home park
turned around and making money, Leta realized
that the same owner from whom she had
bought the mobile-home park also owned some
land that was right next to the mobile-home
park.
After talking with the owner of the land, Leta
realized that she didn’t have the money to buy
and that the owner really didn’t want to sell
because of the taxes he would have to pay.
Because she had taken the time to get to know
the owner from the mobile-home park deal, Leta
felt like the owner trusted her enough to per-
haps do another creative deal. Leta asked the
owner if she could have an option to buy the
land at any point in time over the next 12 months
if she paid the real estate taxes for the owner.
The owner agreed to this and Leta asked a rel-
ative of hers to provide the funds needed to pay
the taxes in exchange for one-half of the deal if
and when she ever bought the property. During
the next year, a new shopping center went in
behind Leta’s land. This made the value go from
$1 million to over $2 million overnight.
A million bucks overnight? That’s how it may
look to some people. We think that Leta’s will-
ingness to take on the mobile-home park
and work hard to turn it around, as well as
her connections with the owner, made all the
difference.
The future of a labor force and also areas where businesses are likely to suc-
ceed can be determined from the plan. From the land developer standpoint,
the master plan helps to protect the project’s value. In addition, a developer
can look at the plan and find new opportunities for development. After all,
the developer is in the business of finding land that can be converted to a
higher and best use.
A land-use map shows a picture of both existing and future land uses such as
residential, commercial, industrial, and centers of employment. It may also
show the various densities of zoning, which tells a land developer where it
may be good to put in a new project. The land-use map typically shows pro-
posed highway interchanges, locations of regional shopping malls, schools,
and churches. This is important information to have in your planning.
When existing zoning on land is different from the master plan, the existing
zoning will actually take precedence over the master plan. Because of this,
as a developer you’ll have the option of moving ahead by using the existing
zoning, or requesting a change to the zoning shown in the master plan.
Although no zoning approval is ever final until it’s done, if you ask for some-
thing that’s already in the master plan, your project is more likely to be
approved.
Going after entitlement
Entitlement means taking a piece of land that formerly wasn’t approved for
development and getting all the necessary zoning changes, applications, and
approvals in place so that the land can be developed and built upon. As an
entitlement specialist, your exit strategy is to sell your land project to a
builder; this strategy is called “taking it to the map.”
So what exactly does this strategy mean? It means that you’re improving the
raw land so a builder can come in and build on the property. The developer
often provides roads, sidewalks, underground utilities, and landscaping, but
this isn’t always the case. On one of the projects we’re selling, for example,
we’re putting in infrastructure on one side but on the other one, we’re
not. We’re just getting the final map showing approved lots — about 43
lots altogether. Each one will have its own separate title. So we’ve done all
the approval process and then it’s up to the builder to put in the road, side-
walks, and utilities. You can do it either way.
Jeff, one of our Commercial Mentoring Program coaches, has two projects
requiring entitlement. When he went into these two projects, his initial exit
strategy was to build out both projects. After these projects were under way,
Jeff found another area that was ripe for land development. He started on
several more deals there. As a result, Jeff decided to take these two projects
“to the map,” but not to build anything. So he’ll sell these to a builder and
focus his attention on the bigger fish he found.
280 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
The approval process and why it frustrates
many would-be investors
Here’s an example of what zoning and the approval process is all about from
the municipality side: The mission statement from the planning department
says:
We will actively promote a diverse, safe, and dynamic community and
enhance the living, working, and recreational choices for all of our citizens
and visitors.
Now let’s translate this into what this mission statement looks like from the
land developer side:
We will create a complex, confusing, and frustrating experience for any and
all developers who attempt to build or improve any area of our community.
To keep the developers guessing, we will change our minds often, and write
our regulations in a way that they are very difficult to interpret.
We’re kidding, of course. Sure, dealing with the various agencies that can
make or break your deal can be a challenge. But it’s a lot more fun if you turn
it into a way to meet interesting people, as opposed to thinking that you’re
going to have to fight with city hall.
Here’s an example of some of the different boards and agencies that you may
have to deal with on your development project (see Table 15-1 for a more
complete list):
 Building and fire code review and appeals board: These folks are
charged with the responsibility for reviewing and updating the city’s
building codes for public safety and best practices.
 Common council or zoning department board of public works: They
advise on any matters concerning public lands or structures.
 Community development authority: They act as an agent of the city
to perform, operate, and administer the city’s housing rehabilitation
services.
 Landmarks commission: They regulate construction or reconstruction,
exterior alterations within locally designated historic districts, and
demolition of historic structures. They also recognize landmarks.
 Planning commission privilege in streets committee: They make rec-
ommendations to the board of public works and the common council
on applications for encroachments into the public right of way.
 Pedestrian/bicycle/motor vehicle commission: They deal with policies
on pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicles systems and facilities.
281Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate
 Urban design commission: They review matters of aesthetics, design,
and appearance of specific building proposals.
 Zoning board of appeals: They hear and act on applications for zoning
variances, appeals to alleged errors in orders, and requirements or
determinations in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance. They also
make the final determination on these issues and appeals to their deci-
sions are made to the courts.
You’ll also meet with the water department and the sewer department to
determine answers to the following questions:
 Is there enough water?
 Is there sewage removal?
 Is it well water? Is it septic?
 If it’s septic, how much waste is allowed?
These are all crucial things to find out within five or six business days of iden-
tifying the property you put under contract.
One of our commercial clients came to a training we had in Hawaii. She got a
piece of land under contract where she thought she could build 68 town-
houses. When she went to the water department, she found out that she’d
never be able to get more than 13 taps. (One tap is required for each town-
house in a project like this.) So she went back to the drawing board and came
up with a way to develop the land with 13 houses on it so that she was able
to get approval.
You’ll also want to meet with fire officials in the area of your land and ask:
 Does the property have fire facility usage?
 Can they provide fire protection for the areas that your project is going
into?
If your property is outside the growth boundary to be serviced by the fire and
ambulance, your project probably won’t be approved by the city council. It
doesn’t matter if all the other agencies like your project — if you don’t have
access to emergency services, your project will get shot down.
Table 15-1 The Departments You May Need to Consult in Land Deals
Department Issues addressed
Engineering Erosion control; flood plain; parking lot drainage; plat
review; sanitary sewer; storm sewer and drainage; storm
water management; street name and address; street layout
and size; utility easements; water detention; wetland zoning
282 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Department Issues addressed
Fire Fire passage; fire flow requirements; fuel tanks; hazardous
materials; service stations; screening over windows; zero-
lot line
Metro Transit Bus stop requirements; easements for operation and infra-
structure; pedestrian/handicap access and circulation; plat
review; street layout and size; transportation and demand
management plans
Parks Open space; park areas; wetland zoning
Traffic Engineering Access control; impact on streets and neighborhoods;
parking lot geometry, layout, and circulation; pedestrian/
bicycle access and circulation; plat review; rights-of-way;
street layout and size; traffic generation; utility easements
Water/Utilities Costs (assessments) distribution; easements; hydrants; main
locations; service; water supply
Planning and Access to buildings; building code compliance; circulation;
Development demolition; design; easement dedication; environmental
hazards; flood plain; floor area ratio; grading plan; handicap
access; heating code compliance; landscape plan; lease of
city property; lot coverage; lot size; national electric code
compliance; parking requirements; plumbing code compli-
ance; sale of city property; screening; soil erosion; signs; site
design; special districts; street encroachments; street
graphics; street occupancy; title; trash pickup enclosures;
units (number of); usable open space; yard setbacks; zoning
Getting the Green Light on Your Deal
Part of doing land development is understanding how local planning, zoning,
and other rules may affect your project. You can expect to deal with govern-
ment agencies on everything from the amount of square feet you can build
and permitted uses to the drainage of storm water. In some areas, you may
need to provide a detailed review of the traffic that will be generated by your
development.
According to the U.S. Constitution, local zoning and planning is left up to the
states. You’d think that at least within one state, there would be some consis-
tency in how they deal with developers. Unfortunately, that isn’t the case. Each
county or municipality has its own rules and regulations. Sometimes even in
one area, different projects fall under different guidelines and add confusion.
283Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate
As an urban area matures over time, the citizens and their political leaders
want to have more specific rules for development and construction. As a
result, the local government fine-tunes the zoning regulations and procedures
to deal with priorities brought up by community leaders. Sometimes, some of
these new regulations may even take effect after your land development pro-
ject is underway. This requires adjusting your development and construction
budgets during the rezoning process as well as throughout the life of your
land development project.
Coauthor Peter Conti’s parents have a small home up in Sydney, Maine, where
they spend their summers. His brother works there on a dairy farm milking
cows. Even though Peter’s brother’s house is on a small piece of land, his
backyard view across lush green fields and trees is spectacular. Looking out
off his back deck, you’d never guess this area has absolutely no zoning. This
means that if someone wanted to rebuild a school bus in their front yard, there
are no regulations to stop him or her from doing so. Luckily, most of the
neighbors work together to keep the community looking nice. In effect, the
zoning and planning departments of any municipality work like the commu-
nity of Sydney works to make the best of any development that happens in
their area.
You may want to take on several projects in one area omce you become famil-
iar with the land-use planning, zoning, and regulations in that jurisdiction. As
strapped as cities are these days with their budgets, they aren’t able to do
much to help developers through the jurisdictions, regulations, or review
procedures. This leaves it up to you as the land developer to understand and
know the local regulations. So make sure that your project meets all the guide-
lines the first time without having to go back and make multiple changes.
Dealing with bureaucrats
As soon as you have a property under contract, plan to talk to officials at the
city council and planning department. Don’t waste any time. If you have the
idea today, within the next day or two, you need to be in front of the planners
to find out the actual use of the property and its zoning.
Tell the planners what you’re contemplating. Get their opinions, and see if
they think the municipality would allow you to change the zoning to provide
for different use. If you want to divide the land up into smaller lots, for exam-
ple, get their opinions on whether they think it would be possible. Ask about
similar projects that have either been approved or disapproved. Doing your
homework early pays off.
Don’t wait until you have a deal under contract to get to know the people at
city hall. Ideally, they should know you by name when you walk in the door.
When talking to city council people, keep in mind that they’re volunteers who
284 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
have normal jobs. Take them to lunch, run your idea by them, and ask, “What
do you think the members of the city council will think about my idea? Will
they like it or not like it?” If the councilperson says, “We hate this idea,” the
proposition will never get passed when it comes time for a vote.
285Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate
Lifestyle development policy: An
idea whose time has come
There’s a movement to create lifestyle com-
mercial and mixed-use development through
public policy and land use ordinances. Instead
of just developing property to make a profit, the
idea is that everyone works together to have a
nice place to live and meet the needs of the
community.
This concept is based on the following lifestyle
development principles:
 Efficient use of land resources: This means
that, especially when developing in urban
areas, the development is compact, using
only as much land as necessary.
 Full use of city or county services: This
requires planning developments in order to
fully use existing and planned services.
 Mixed use: Mixed-use development brings
land uses that are compatible closer
together. An example would be a shopping
complex that includes condos on the
second and third floors.
 Transportation options: Wouldn’t it be great
to live somewhere where you could get
around by walking, bicycling, or using
public transit? It seems like everyone riding
around in cars is a throwback to the Old
West when everyone had his own horse.
 Detailed, human-scaled design: Lifestyle
design means the development is attractive,
design-friendly to pedestrians, and takes
into account the community’s character and
history.
These principles make up smart ways of build-
ing a community because they provide benefits
to everyone who lives there while making intel-
ligent use of financial and natural resources.
Lifestyle development helps support most
states’ land use and transportation policies. It
also provides a number of benefits including:
 Economic development and improved tax
base
 Revitalization of downtowns, main streets,
and neighborhood centers
 Housing that’s close to jobs and services
 Job creation, allowing people to walk to
work
 Choices for transportation and the ability to
connect between different methods of
transport
 Communities in which people can actu-
ally walk rather than drive (Wow, what a
concept!)
 Reduction of that hated bumper-to-bumper
traffic
 Ways to use existing urban services and
facilities, instead of continuing to expand
into new areas
 Energy saving by not relying as much on
cars
If after hearing several different opinions you’re still being told that your idea
won’t ever get through, you have your decision right there. All that negativity
makes it easy to decide not to move. Either come up with a project that the
council likes or find a different piece of land. Whatever you do, don’t fight
city hall.
Avoiding neighborhood opposition
One of the most important keys to getting your land development projects
approved these days is making sure that you’re going into an area where
people will approve of your project idea. This means working with your
prospective neighbors rather than against them. Conduct some investigative
meetings to get their suggestions. Doing this can go a long way toward avoid-
ing mob-type crowds who get mad and want to kill your deal. Get to know the
leaders and people in the community as much you can. If you get a feel for
how they want to develop the area, you’ll be much more successful.
Because the process of dealing with your neighbors is going to differ in every
municipality, predicting what can happen is difficult. But here’s a good exam-
ple: Before filing an application, the land developer provides written notice to
neighborhood associations and the municipality. After the application is sub-
mitted, the following procedure is used to notify neighboring property owners
and the neighborhood association of the pending application and the upcom-
ing public hearing on the application:
1. The zoning staff posts a sign.
At the time of application, the zoning staff provides a sign to the land
developer indicating the time and place of the public hearing. The sign
is required to be posted on the property that’s the subject of the public
hearing.
2. Notice is given to the neighborhood.
Following the submittal of the application, the planners send a notice to
the neighborhood association saying that the application was submitted
and indicate the pending public hearing dates.
3. A public hearing article is printed in the newspaper.
Public hearing notices are typically published in the local newspaper,
which carries legal notices.
4. Notices are mailed to property owners and occupants.
Ten days before the public hearing, the planner’s staff sends a notice to
the neighborhood association and all property owners and occupants or
residents within 200 feet of the perimeter of the property subject to the
public hearing.
286 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
5. A public hearing is held.
A public hearing is held by the commission or agency that has final
authority to approve or reject the request for rezoning or development.
Depending on the area, you may need to deal with one, two, or some-
times even more agencies.
287Chapter 15: Land Development: The Heart of Commercial Real Estate
Our bold challenge to the press
Because we have been called the “World’s #1
Greatest Commercial Real Estate Mentors,” it’s
not a surprise to anyone that we get attention
from two very different types of people. The first
category is people like you, who are serious
about taking big steps in their life and aren’t
afraid to search for knowledge or guidance to
make sure that you get where you want to go.
The other category contains those who say they
want to do big things, but when push comes to
shove, they quickly come up with a thousand
reasons why they can’t do something new: I
don’t have the money yet. I’m going to wait for a
better time. Real estate would be great but only
if I got started ten years ago. And they go on and
on. By coming up with excuses to give to other
people, they convince themselves in the
process that they are doing the right thing by
playing it safe.
We believe to the core of our being that a will-
ingness to step up to the challenges life offers
us is what makes champions of us all. To prove
that successful commercial real estate invest-
ing is really possible, we recently took the bold
step of issuing a challenge to the press to prove
that anyone, and we do mean anyone, can make
$1 million or more by investing in commercial
land development.
After all, if your authors, a former auto
mechanic and introverted engineer, can make a
fortune investing in commercial real estate,
then you can too. Here’s the challenge that we
sent out to 3,159 TV stations, radio stations, and
newspapers:
Give us a team of people who are commit-
ted to going after their dreams, and within
90 days they will have a land development
deal under contract and within 180 days the
project will be fully underway. By the time
the team is done, they will have developed
the knowledge and confidence to be able to
put together commercial deals on their own
and they will have made $1 million or more.
We believe that the key to making things
happen is in making a commitment that you
can’t back down from. We have publicly put
ourselves on the line and now the pressure is
on. We are going to win or lose with the whole
world watching us. To watch those we’ve
picked to be on the challenge team in action
and cheer them on, go to www.landdevelop
mentchallenge.com.
288 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Chapter 16
Expert Tax Advantages
and Strategies
In This Chapter
 Using tax benefits to maximize your wealth
 Choosing an entity based on the expected tax benefits
 Discovering the tax advantages of owning commercial real estate
 Determining how depreciation can save you thousands in taxes
 Avoiding taxes with a 1031 exchange trade
 Saving money with commonly overlooked loopholes
One of the biggest expenses you’ll face owning and operating commercial
properties will be your tax bill. So, doesn’t it make sense to have a plan
to pay as little tax as legally possible? And what if you found a way to defer
paying taxes on profits for just about forever? If you’re interested in knowing
more — and we bet you are — read this chapter.
As a commercial real estate investor, you have a partner in every single deal
you do — even if you think that you’re investing by yourself. Sorry, you have
no choice: Uncle Sam is your partner whether you like it or not. Fortunately,
there are ways that you can use the existing laws to reduce (or sometimes
eliminate) the shares that your partner, Uncle Sam, takes away from your
commercial real estate profits.
In addition, you can actually get benefits from owning commercial real estate,
and these benefits allow you to offset or pay less tax on income from other
sources. The government does put limitations on this benefit, and it’s also
important to know how you can use real estate to pay less tax on your profits
from commercial real estate investing and realize those benefits as quickly as
possible.
An Overview of Money-Making
Tax Strategies
When you buy real estate, be sure to look at the tax consequences of buying
because it affects your real estate purchase. In fact, remember that the “go”
or “no go” decision on commercial real estate often boils down to the tax
benefits. So, you want to include this info in your property analysis. When we
look at a commercial property, we include the tax benefits right along with its
cash-on-cash return. Taxes are part of the total return calculation — positive
or negative — that the property will have for you.
You can make money investing in commercial real estate — without paying
taxes — with the following four tactics:
 Appreciation
 Depreciation and other tax advantages
 Paying down the mortgage
 Rolling over
Appreciation
Appreciation occurs when the value of your commercial property goes up
over time (or maybe even overnight!) because you’ve increased the net oper-
ating income. Or, over time, the value increases simply due to the economic
factors in the marketplace such as supply and demand and/or falling capital-
ization rates. The value can also go up quickly when you find a property
where rents are below market and you jump in to increase the rents. Make
sure you use the techniques in Chapter 18 to increase the net income of your
commercial properties. You see that when the net income on a property
increases, its value does also.
Tapping into the appreciation in your commercial property without paying
taxes on it is simple: All you have to do is refinance the property or take out
another mortgage. You won’t owe any taxes on the money you receive
because borrowed funds aren’t taxable.
The downside to borrowing equity out of your commercial property is that
when you sell it, you have to pay tax on any money that you’ve borrowed out
of the property. So, be careful and understand that tax benefits like this are
great to have, but you must plan carefully so that you aren’t surprised by a
tax bill when you least expect it.
290 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Depreciation
Depreciation occurs when the value of an asset declines because of wear and
tear or obsolescence. Obsolescence is a fancy word for saying that something
no longer has the same value as it did because needs change over time. For
example, the computer you bought 15 years ago — even if it’s in brand-new
condition — isn’t worth the same amount as a computer you can buy today.
In the same way, a commercial property that was designed 30 or 40 years ago
won’t meet the standards that you’re looking for in a commercial property
today. In commercial real estate, this change in value is called economic
obsolescence.
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) allows you a deduction for depreciation
“on paper” whether your commercial property is profitable or not. So, in effect,
you can have a commercial property that makes money every year, yet on
your tax return, you get to pretend it had a loss (and pay no taxes). What an
awesome benefit! This deduction is one of the most important reasons that
high-income earners have quality commercial properties in their portfolios.
In addition to the benefit of depreciation, as a commercial property investor,
you get other benefits just by being in business as a real estate investor. For
example, you can deduct the mortgage interest and a variety of other deduc-
tions for rental properties. And because you’re in business, as long as you
follow the rules, you can deduct expenses such as driving to your properties
from your office, purchasing a computer, and all kinds of other cool things
you couldn’t write off if you weren’t in business for yourself (we discuss all
these deductions later in the chapter).
Paying down the mortgage
Another tax benefit is when you use the income from your tenants to pay
down the mortgage or loan on a property. As you pay down the loan balance,
your equity increases. Not only are you increasing your wealth that way, but
also the interest amount of the loan that you pay every year is tax deductible.
The higher the loan amount, the more interest there is to deduct. This deduc-
tion is the reason it makes sense to leverage your way into a property. You
can leverage by using a small amount of your money as a down payment on
a property and then borrowing the rest from a lender. Sometimes you can
even borrow most of the funds you need from the owner of the property
through an owner-carry agreement (see Chapter 9 for more on these agree-
ments). As a result of this leverage principle, you can make tremendously
high rates of return.
291Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies
Rolling over
With commercial real estate, you can take all the profits that you’ve made in
a property — including all of your appreciation, depreciation benefits, and
mortgage reduction equity and roll them over by trading into another prop-
erty. This is called a 1031 tax-deferred exchange. With this exchange, instead
of paying taxes when you sell a property, you can take your profits and rein-
vest or roll it into another property over time. That’s just like getting an
interest-free loan from the government!
Being an Investor or a Dealer:
The Difference Is Huge
Depending on how you run your commercial real estate investing business,
the IRS puts you into one of two categories: You’re either considered an
investor or a dealer. What’s the difference between these two? Quite a bit as
you’ll discover in this section.
In the end, you may find it best to be considered an investor, not a dealer. Or
you may love the idea of building and flipping deals so that you get to play
the role of a dealer in the eyes of the IRS. Whatever route you take, under-
stand the path that you’re on, and take the tax effects of your decisions into
account. It’s not how much you make that counts; it’s how much you keep
that’s really important.
At some point you may end up buying and selling commercial properties
quickly so you can make some quick cash. However, you’re probably also
going to invest in long-term-hold properties. To avoid running into problems,
we suggest putting these different business activities into two different busi-
ness entities. Doing so enables you to be treated as a dealer and as an investor.
Be sure to consult your tax strategists on this. After all, we can give you our
ideas and opinions, but it’s up to you to check with your own tax counsel to
see what’s most appropriate for you.
Holding real estate long term as an investor
As an investor, you’re a passive owner who holds real estate for long-term
cash flow and appreciation. In other words, you buy and hold rental or other
income property, and then you sell or exchange it after a number of years.
Benefits of being an investor include the following:
292 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
 Your long-term gains are taxed at a capital gains rate, which is likely
lower than your personal income tax rate.
 Your gains aren’t subject to self-employment taxes.
 You can defer your gains and pay no tax when you do a 1031 tax-
deferred exchange.
 You can deduct the depreciation expense.
To take advantage of the lower long-term capital gains rates of 15 percent,
you must keep all of your properties for at least one year and one day before
selling. When you hold a property this long, it demonstrates your intent to
operate as an investor rather than as a dealer.
Buying and selling quickly as a dealer
A dealer is someone who holds real estate for short-term resale purposes in
the ordinary course of a trade or business. Usually as a dealer, you’re into
building, rehabbing, and possibly flipping properties (buying and selling
them as quickly as possible). Benefits of being a dealer include the following:
 When you have a loss on the sale of the dealer property, that loss is fully
deductible against ordinary income. As a dealer, your losses aren’t sub-
ject to passive loss limitations regardless of what your adjusted gross
income is.
 You can get in and out of a deal so that you capture your profits right
away.
Here are the downsides of being a dealer:
 All the profits you make as a dealer are to be taxed at ordinary income
rates, which are currently as high as 35 percent.
 You can’t get depreciation deductions.
 Your profits may also be subject to self-employment taxes of 15 percent.
 You can’t take advantage of the 1031 tax-deferred exchange or an install-
ment sale to delay paying taxes.
Naming Yourself a Real Estate
Professional: It Pays
One of the really cool things about commercial real estate is that a property
can show a tax loss yet still be putting cash in your pocket money every
293Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies
single year. The tax loss is created by the paper deduction of depreciation as
well as all the interest and other deductions that you’re entitled to (see the
earlier section “An Overview of Money-Making Tax Strategies” for details).
Under the current tax code, these losses that you can claim from your com-
mercial real estate are called passive losses.
The tax code says that passive losses can only be deducted against net
income in the same passive category. This means passive income — money
made from rentals and gains from your commercial rental property activities.
In other words, you can use the losses from your commercial real estate to
offset the gains from other real estate investing, but not to offset the gains
you’ve made from income in other areas, such as working your regular job.
The rules say passive losses are limited to $25,000 per year, in most cases.
However, as your income exceeds $100,000, this limit gets phased out. In fact,
it actually disappears completely at the $150,000 income level. But these
rules don’t apply to those folks who are considered real estate professionals.
So, make sure that you meet the strict IRS requirements of being a real estate
professional. Then you can take an unlimited amount of passive losses as a
write-off each year.
One way to qualify as a “real estate professional” is to own more than 5 per-
cent of a business involved in real estate activities (you can’t be classified as
an employee). Some examples of qualifying activities could be selling real
estate as a broker, leasing real estate, being an architect or a developer, and
running a management company or structural engineering firm.
One of the easiest ways to qualify as a real estate professional, however, is to
have your real estate broker’s license and operate as an independent busi-
ness that you own (instead of working as an employee for someone else).
The IRS considers the amount of time you spend on real estate activities com-
pared with other work you do. To be called a professional, the regulations
require that you spend at least 750 hours a year on real estate activities. You
also have to work more on your real estate activities than you do on any
other job you have. So, if you’re working 40 hours a week as a dentist, you’d
have to work 41 hours a week in your real estate investing activities to meet
the requirements of a real estate professional. Wow, 81 hours a week — that
may not be the lifestyle you want to be living.
Some people have accused the IRS of showing unfair benefits to married
people (all you married people out there better listen up!). For example, a
single person who’s making high earnings in a non–real estate business, such
as an investment banker, wouldn’t be able to qualify as a real estate profes-
sional. However, if the investment banker’s spouse meets the requirements
for a real estate professional, the couple can take the deductions because the
spouse qualifies. In this way, all the income from the high earner can be offset
without limitations when it comes to paying taxes.
294 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Choosing Your Entity: An Important
Tax Preparation Before You Buy
Your tax planning and preparation needs to begin even before you buy your
first property. Putting your latest property into a corporation may cause you
to be taxed doubly. Closing your deal as a sole proprietor causes you to be
taxed at the highest possible rate. The most popular choice for entities is the
limited liability company (LLC). It provides the liability protection of a corpo-
ration and the flexibility benefits of a sole proprietor. But never decide on
using a particular type of entity because everyone else is using it. There is no
one-size-fits-all entity.
One of the first tax planning choices you need to make is determining the
type of entity you should use to hold title to your properties. The word entity
is a fancy term that pretty much refers to your company. An entity can be any
of the following:
 A sole proprietorship
 A corporation
 A limited liability company
 A limited partnership
Many real estate investors like to use limited liability companies because
they’re easy to get started and they offer good liability protection. They have
proven to be one of the best entities for holding real estate because of their
ease of use, asset protection qualities, and favorable tax treatments. (Check
out Chapter 12 for more on how you can use entities to protect your assets.)
We suggest meeting with your attorney and tax strategist to decide which
entity is best for you. When discussing entities, be sure to consider these
four things:
 Liability protection: Ideally, having a separate entity prevents any prob-
lems from your commercial property from affecting your other assets,
such as your house and cars.
 Tax benefits: If you’re buying this property as a tax shelter of some sort,
make sure that both of your advisors agree that you actually can. If you
have partners in your deal, ensure that your entity of choice is the best
fit and provides the best tax advantages.
 Costs and administrative requirements: You need to know what require-
ments there are to run your entity over time. Entities, for instance, may
require annual meetings among partners, tax returns, and payment of
annual fees in order to remain in good standing with the state.
295Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies
 Exit strategy planning: What are the tax consequences of selling? What
if the partnership breaks up? What if one partner becomes ill? Or dies?
Is the property transferable between entities without incurring a tax hit?
No matter which type of entity is used to hold your commercial real estate
properties, be sure to have adequate liability and other insurance protection
in place. These protections are your first line of defense to avert disaster.
(Flip to Chapter 12 for more on protecting your assets.)
Sole proprietorships
A sole proprietorship is one of the easiest ways of putting together a business
because it requires no organizational filings or annual paperwork. You don’t
even need to file a separate tax return. Instead, your business reports its
income or loss on Schedule C of your federal income tax return.
Having a sole proprietorship doesn’t give you any liability protection. You’re
completely exposed to lawsuits. With commercial real estate, accidents and
other liabilities can happen during the construction phase and from having
people on or living in the property. Without protection, these liabilities can
be disastrous to your wealth-building strategies. For this reason, you’ll proba-
bly want to use an entity other than a sole proprietorship for your commer-
cial property.
Corporations
Corporations give you good liability protection. But in most cases, they aren’t
the best entity for holding real estate properties because of double taxation.
They are taxed as separate entities; as a corporation and then again at their
individual rates. Corporations aren’t that flexible, accounting-wise, compared
to LLCs and require, but are not limited to, annual reports, boards of direc-
tors, and federal reporting. We like to use corporations to either manage
LLCs or to run businesses out of, but not to hold real estate.
If you’re set on using a corporation, we highly recommend that you check
with your tax strategist and your attorney to find out if it truly makes sense
for you and your situation. There are actually two types of corporations —
one is called a C-corporation and the other called an S-corporation. Each has
distinct functions and uses that depend on your and your company’s setup
and investment objectives. Consult an entity expert.
296 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Limited liability companies
Limited liability companies (LLCs) are one of the best entities you can use for
investing in commercial real estate. Why? Because these entities give you a
lot of flexibility with respect to dividing up the benefits related to a property.
In other words, they allow you to divide profits and tax benefits unequally if
you want to. For example, the high-income earning professional may want to
tap into more of the tax benefits than some of the other owners (who may
want to take more profits). Dividing tax benefits and profits unequally can be
tough to do with a corporation, so if you need to do this, an LLC may be the
better choice for you. LLCs are fairly easy to run. For example, you don’t need
to hold annual meetings and you don’t have as much paperwork as you do
with corporations.
Limited partnerships
A limited partnership (LP) is a popular form of holding real estate for investors
who want to be limited partners. They basically invest their money while
having liability protection and limited liability from the partnership’s debt,
creditors, and lawsuits. A limited partner doesn’t get to participate in the
management of the business. But there is one partner, a general partner, who
assumes liability for the partnership’s debt as well as controls the company’s
day-to-day operations. In most cases, the general partner is an LLC, which
provides a layer of liability protection for him. LPs are popularly used to attract
investors who want to participate in the profits, but desire to limit their risks
(their cash investment only) and want no part in the daily operations. Limited
partners may also be replaced or leave the partnership without it having to
be dissolved.
Digging into Depreciation
We’ve mentioned depreciation a few times already in this chapter. In this sec-
tion, we dig a little deeper and explain how depreciation can save you tens of
thousands of dollars in taxes. Depreciation, as you may know, is the tax term
that lets you pretend that all the improvements made to the raw land in com-
mercial real estate properties are wearing out. Think of the improvements as
the buildings, the roads, the landscaping, and so on. But remember that you
can only write off or depreciate the improvements on a property. This includes
the building and other improvements but doesn’t include things that don’t
wear out — like the land itself. Depreciation allows you to write off or deduct
a portion of the value of all the improvements according to the schedule
below:
297Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies
 Over 271
⁄2 years for residential homes and multiunit properties
 Over 39 years for commercial nonresidential properties
So, for example, the tax code for commercial property allows investors to
depreciate 1
⁄39 th of the value of the improvements on your commercial prop-
erty over time. This means that over 39 years, you get a deduction on your
taxes every year “on paper.” Now, the “on paper” part is important because
normally to have a deduction you have to spend some money. You have to
have an expense in order for the IRS to let you write it off. After the 39 years,
the depreciation is used up and you can no longer take it. But few properties
stay with a single owner for that long.
With depreciation, however, you don’t need an expense in order to get the
deduction (though some day you’ll need to eventually replace the property
when it really does wear out). So, it’s possible to have a property that loses
money on paper while making money in real life. The end result is that on
your tax return, you get to take a loss, which lets you pay less money in
taxes — yet the property still brings in money for you. How cool is that?
Any time you have an asset that’s being depreciated, when that asset is no
longer usable, you can fully write off all the remaining depreciation and get all
the tax benefits right away. For example, if you have a computer that you’re
depreciating on a five-year schedule, and two years after you bought it, your
hard drive goes up in smoke, you can fully depreciate the computer at that
point, instead of waiting another three years (see the later section, “Cost
segregation: Saving thousands more by separating your property parts,” for
more on depreciating personal property). You did back up your computer
files, didn’t you?
298 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
So, you plan on selling?
Let’s say you decide that you’d like to sell the
commercial real estate property that you have
owned over the past few years (and we’ll
assume also that you have a huge pile of profits
to go along with that property). Before you sell,
spend time with your tax strategist to find out
what the effect of the sale will be for you tax-
wise. Specifically ask how you can structure
the sale to take maximum advantage of all the
loopholes in the tax code available for you as a
commercial real estate investor.
Your tax strategist will likely ask you, “Has this
been a long-term or a short-term property for
you?” A long-term investment requires that you
hold a property for at least one year and one
day. This way, you pay capital gains taxes rather
than ordinary income taxes on any gains
you make. So by holding it for over a year, you
pay a lot less in tax. You will also be asked,
“Have you considered doing a 1031 tax-
deferred exchange?” This strategy allows
you to defer paying any capital gains taxes
as long as you meet certain presale criteria.
See www.1031taxcodesecrets.com
for more information on 1031 exchanges.
In the following sections, we explain all you need to know about taking full
advantage of depreciation.
The magic of depreciation
The magic of depreciation is that it isn’t based on your down payment or on
the amount of money that you invest in a deal. Rather, it’s based on the value
of the commercial property minus the value of the land.
Here’s a simple example: Let’s say you bought one or two smaller commercial
properties over the first year or so of your investing career. Then you really
wanted to knock one out of the park, and so you bought a property by using
other investors’ money. In fact, let’s say that you purchased a large office
complex worth $50 million.
Assuming that you’re the only owner, you now have the ability to depreciate
or write off 1
⁄39 th of the value of the improvements on the property (not the
land) over each of the next 39 years. So keeping it simple, let’s say the value
of the land is $11 million. On that land is your large office complex and all the
other improvements valued at $39 million. So, for the next 39 years, you have
an annual deduction of $1 million. We know we’re stretching the numbers a
bit to have some fun here, but we hope it opens your eyes to various possibil-
ities involving tax savings.
Depreciation applies also to capital improvements such as putting in a new
parking lot or placing a new roof on your commercial property. So, when you
put on a new roof, you get to start depreciating that roof over the next 39
years. And if you replace it again in 17 years, you can write off the remaining
years left as one big chunk and then start over again with 39 years for the
new roof.
Don’t “recapture” your depreciation
When you sell your property, make sure that you talk to your tax strategist
about the effects of the depreciation that you’ve taken over the years.
Investors who receive tax benefits such as depreciation over time and then
borrow money out of the property to either reinvest in other properties or to
buy a big boat may get a surprise when they “recapture” all that depreciation
when the property is sold. Recapturing is a fancy IRS name for: “We gave you
a break back then and let you out of paying taxes. Now you owe us all the
taxes. Tough luck, buddy.”
To avoid recapturing your depreciation, consider doing an exchange of prop-
erty, which is known as a 1031 tax-deferred exchange. An exchange such as
this occurs when you take your profits out of the property and instead of
299Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies
putting them in your pocket, you reinvest them in another property. This
well-known process allows you to take all the taxes that you would have had
to pay on your profits and invest them into other commercial real estate,
which will continue to make you income for years to come. A 1031 exchange
is such a great benefit that we call it “the golden goose.” In fact, if you don’t
use 1031 exchanges, it’s like killing off the golden goose that lays the golden
eggs of passive income for you.
If one day you decide to sell and not perform a 1031 exchange, you’ll pay
taxes. So make sure that your heirs (spouses, kids, estates, and so on) under-
stand this as well. Include a copy of this book in your estate planning to edu-
cate whoever is next in line to own your property.
Cost segregation: Saving thousands more
by separating your property parts
It’s important to understand that by separating different parts of the improve-
ments to your property, you can actually depreciate some at a much faster
rate than others. This means that you can realize those tax savings sooner
rather than later. And that means more money in your pocket sooner.
You already know that you can depreciate a property over either 27 1
⁄2 years or
39 years, depending on whether it’s considered residential or commercial.
But just wait — it gets even better. When the many components of the build-
ing are broken out and listed separately, which is called cost segregation, you
can get even greater tax savings. How? Through a faster depreciation sched-
ule. By accelerating the schedule, all the money you save taxes on comes to
you sooner.
Some of the improvements can actually be written off over 5 to 7 years or
over 15 years, depending on what they are. These improvements include
things like stoves, refrigerators, carpeting, counters, cabinets, shelves, light
fixtures, plumbing fixtures, and even the value of landscaping that’s been
added to the property. When considering cost segregating, break up the prop-
erty into three parts — personal property, land improvements, and the build-
ing itself. Personal property can normally be depreciated over the five to
seven year period. Land improvements such as sidewalks and fences can be
depreciated over 15 years. And the building itself is depreciated over the full
39 years.
Here’s a typical list of land improvements that you can depreciate over 15
years:
 Curbs
 Docks
300 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
 Drainage
 Driveways
 Fences
 Landscaping
 Sewer lines
 Shrubbery
 Sidewalks
And here are just some of the personal property items you can depreciate
over five to seven years:
 Carpets that aren’t glued down
 Drapes
 Fire extinguishers
 Miniblinds
 Refrigerators
 Stoves
 Wiring for the building’s electrical system
 Plumbing fixtures
The really cool thing with cost segregation is that it applies to anything that’s
movable. If you think we’re kidding, consider what our CPA and tax strategist
was able to write off within five years: walls! When he moved into his new
office, instead of dividing up the offices by using walls that were secured to
the floor and ceiling, he chose to use movable walls instead. (And if you were
go into his office and look at the walls, you probably wouldn’t even notice the
difference!) From a tax standpoint, the fact that the walls are movable means
that he can write off the cost of the walls over 5 years rather than over 39
years.
It’s ideas like putting up moveable walls that can make you tons of money
over the years. If your CPA or tax strategist isn’t investing in commercial real
estate and doesn’t use the ideas that you’re gleaning from this book, it may
be time to look for a new CPA. That advice may seem kind of cold, but it’s
real-world advice. Or buy him a copy of this book as starters!
Coming up with the value for cost segregation
Instead of picking values out of thin air as far as what you think the various
pieces of personal property are worth and what the land improvements and
building are valued at, perform a formal cost segregation study. This study
documents how you come up with accurate values for the items that you’re
depreciating faster by using cost segregation.
301Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies
If the value of all the personal property is $1 million or more, CPAs recom-
mend that you hire an engineering firm to do a cost segregation study for
you, because cost segregation is closely watched by IRS auditors. Hiring a
firm does require putting in some extra effort and expense upfront, but it’s
absolutely worth it in the end because of the great tax savings you’ll realize.
When considering cost segregation for your property, weigh the costs of the
firm’s study with the first year of tax savings. Our CPAs recommend at least
a 2 to 1 ratio of first year savings to costs.
If you plan to flip a property right away, you may end up spending more on
the cost segregation study than the benefits that you’re able to get. So don’t
bother using this loophole if you’re only going to own the property for one or
two years. Because cost segregation studies can cost tens of thousands of
dollars on large properties, you may not be able to capture the costs of the
study and reap the full benefits of it if you sell too quickly.
How cost segregation puts cash in your pockets
Sure it’s more work to sit down with your tax strategist and separate out the
values of all the stoves, refrigerators, carpeting, and so on that are part of
that 300-unit property you just bought. But the upside is that by using cost
segregation, you get extra tax deductions, which can help put more cash in
your pocket — right here and right now.
We believe that any money that you can make immediately is worth more
than the same amount of money that you may make many years from now.
Can we hear an “Amen” to that?
The 1031 Exchange: Avoiding Taxes
by Trading In for Another Property
With commercial real estate, when your property has increased in value, you
have the choice of simply selling the property outright and getting a big
check at the closing table (after taxes, of course) or using the magic of a
1031 tax-deferred exchange, which allows you to make even more money.
A 1031 tax-deferred exchange allows you to roll over money that you get
from the sale of your old property into a new property while deferring
paying taxes. So, if you’ve made $200,000 in the first commercial property
that you’ve invested in, you can sell this property and buy a second one by
using the $200,000 as a down payment.
When it comes time to sell your second property, you can take your original
$200,000 in profits from the first property, along with whatever you made in
the second property and continue to roll over the gains again into yet another
302 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
property. There’s no limit to the number of times you can do an exchange in
this manner. Clearly, it’s a great way to build your real estate wealth without
paying taxes on it as you go. However, if some day you don’t want to buy
another property and want to sell the one you have for profit, you’re going
to have to pay taxes.
To meet the requirements for a fully tax-deferred 1031 exchange, the new
property must cost more than the old property, and the loans on the
new property must be the same size or bigger than the loans on the old
property. In addition to this, you can’t get any cash from the sale.
When you’re involved in a 1031 exchange, you can sell any type of investment
property and buy any other type of investment property. In other words, you
can sell an office building and buy a warehouse or you can sell an apartment
building and buy bare land. The properties both must be real estate invest-
ments, though. You can’t sell a rental property and buy personal property
like a motor home or boat.
Before anything else, get expert help
To avoid having your exchange disqualified by the IRS, you need to be sure to
follow the rules correctly when doing a 1031 tax-deferred exchange. How?
You need to hire an expert called an exchange accommodator. The accom-
modator shows up when you sell your old property, takes all the money you
would have received, and then leaves. Then the accommodator brings your
cash to the closing when you purchase your new property. The accommoda-
tor also helps to make sure that you follow all the rules so that your exchange
isn’t disqualified by the IRS. Make a mistake here and you’ll end up paying
those pesky taxes. Ouch!
Exchange accommodators are unregulated by the government. You’d think
that given the tremendous amounts of money that they hold, they would
need to be licensed, bonded, and regulated, but that’s not the case. People
who want to present themselves as accommodators may do so, even if they’re
convicted felons. Obviously, you really need to know who you’re dealing with.
This is where the strength of your relationships and connections with people
in your network pays off for you. When choosing an accommodator for your
exchange, make sure to consider the following:
 Experience: Make sure your prospective accommodator has at least ten
years of experience.
 Tax law knowledge: The 1031 exchange is an IRS tax code, so deep
knowledge in tax law is a must.
 Fidelity-bonded: Your accommodator should have a sizeable fidelity
bond as well as adequate liability insurance.
303Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies
 Members of the Federation of Exchange Accommodators: Ensure that
your accommodator is a member of this national trade organization spe-
cializing in 1031 exchanges. His or her membership provides credibility
and reputability.
Surveying the exchange rules
The first time that you’re involved in a delayed exchange, you’ll find it a bit
weird to see your accommodator walk out of the closing with all of your prof-
its. You may be a little unclear as to what’s going on. But don’t fret, here’s a
summary of the 1031 tax-free exchange rules, courtesy of our personal
accommodator Gary Gorman:
 Property that you hold for investment or that’s used in a trade or busi-
ness qualifies for a 1031 exchange. Held for investment means that you
intend to hold the property for future appreciation, or for the produc-
tion of income. Property that you intend to resell quickly doesn’t qualify
for an exchange, so make sure that your properties, both old and new,
are held as an investment for least one year and one day.
 From the day you close the sale of the old property, you have 45 days
to come up with a list of properties that you want to buy. You must
follow these three rules when coming up with a list of properties:
• Three Property Rule: You can identify up to three properties
regardless of their market value.
• 200% Rule: You can identify as many properties as you want as
long as the cumulative total of the market value do not exceed 200
percent of the property value that you’re selling.
• 95% Rule: You can identify as many properties as you want as long
as the cumulative total of the market values is at least 95 percent
of the property value that you’re selling.
The list of properties absolutely must be sent to the accommodator on
or before the 45th day or you will not be allowed to proceed with the
1031 exchange. You’ll have to pay the taxes if you don’t.
The 45-day rule must be adhered to even if the 45th day falls on a week-
end or holiday.
 From the day you close the sale of your old property, you have 180
days to close on the purchase of your new property. You have to buy
one of the properties on the 45-day list that was sent to the accommoda-
tor. Failure to close on or before the 180th day means that your
exchange is hereby cancelled — hello taxes!
304 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
 You can’t receive or have access to the money between the sale of
your old property and the purchase of your new property. By federal
tax law, you’re required to use the services of an independent third
party, which is your accommodator.
 The old and new property ownership must be the same. This require-
ment means that the name or entity on the tax return of the owner of the
old property has to be the same person or entity who owns the new
property. For example, you can’t sell a property that you own in your
name personally and buy the new property in the name of your limited
liability company.
 In order to avoid paying tax, the selling price of your new property
must be equal to or greater than the net selling price of the old prop-
erty. The net selling price is the selling price minus the closing costs.
 You must reinvest all the cash. Any cash that you access becomes tax-
able to you. In the eyes of the IRS, if you take cash, you’ve sold some-
thing. So, no matter how much cash you invested in the old property, if
you touch any cash at all, you pay taxes on it.
If any of these rules are not followed exactly, your 1031 exchange is null and
void. Uncle Sam will be at your door happily waiting for what’s due to him.
Don’t bother with excuses, just pay the man.
Our accommodator, Gary Gorman, has written an excellent book called
Exchanging Up (Success DNA, 2005), which goes into all the detail you need to
do a 1031 tax-deferred exchange. We like this book because it’s a simple-and-
easy read, not complicated or confusing as many books on tax issues are.
Visit www.1031taxcodesecrets.com for more information on Gary’s book
or to get your questions answered by the 1031 experts.
Taking Advantage of Some Commonly
Overlooked Deductions
Throughout this chapter, we discuss depreciation, mortgage interest, and
itemizing expenses, all of which can significantly reduce your tax burden. But
other tax loopholes are out there.
The following list is only a partial one showing what’s typically deductible.
This topic is far reaching and can only be maximized by a tax professional.
Get the advice of an experienced tax professional who understands tax impli-
cations of commercial real estate not just single-family residences.
305Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies
Accounting expenses
Be sure to deduct your accounting and bookkeeping expenses, and don’t let
us catch you doing your own accounting or bookkeeping! Your time is much
more valuable than that! Instead, hire someone to take care of your books for
you. And remember that everything you spend in this category is completely
deductible as an expense in your real estate business.
Consulting expenses
From time to time, you’ll likely want to bring in consultants to help you strate-
gize or to guide you through an area in which you don’t have expertise, such
as condo conversions. Paying these consultants is an expense to your busi-
ness and therefore fully deductible. Here are some consultants who you may
use and whose payments are deductible: appraisers, financial planners,
mentors, and architects.
Many tax advisors cost of researching your business and educating yourself
is deductible as well. Going to real estate-related seminars, buying books,
tapes, trade magazine subscriptions, and dues to professional organizations
usually are too.
Home office expenses
For most real estate investors, it’s great working from home. Our friends often
tease us about walking into the kitchen and grabbing a cup of coffee, and then
arriving at our offices about 30 seconds later. The good news is that all of your
expenses for your home office are completely deductible. That includes the
cost to heat or cool your office, to clean your office, and other things that
people have to pay for even though they don’t have a commercial real estate
investing business. (By the way, your dog and the family piano can’t be con-
sidered expenses — no matter how much better they help you work.)
Office equipment such as computers, fax machines, copiers, and phones can
be fully deducted. And don’t forget the beautiful leather office furniture and
mahogany desk and shelving!
Here are some ways to support your home office deductions:
 Use a separate room for business use only, and perform most of your
administrative and management activities in that home office.
 Spend a substantial amount of your office time in your home office.
306 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
 Use your home address as your business address and put it on your
business card.
 Get a separate phone and fax line for your home office.
 For IRS auditing proof, document everything by keeping logs of time
spent in your home office and take photographs of your office and its
furnishings just in case you move and are audited years later.
All property-related expenses
When running commercial real estate properties, you incur month-to-month
expenses (traveling, cellphone, and business meals, for example) and even
surprise expenses such as maintenance and repairs. The good news is that
you’ll be collecting income from your tenants to cover these expenses. Plus,
the really good news is that nearly all these expenses are fully deductible for
you as a business owner.
Transportation to and from your properties
It’s important to go by and check on your properties from time to time. If
they’re in town, keep track of your mileage so you can write it off as a travel
expense. If you’re traveling across the country to look at your properties,
make sure you maintain a list of all your expenses including your rental car,
airfare, business meals while eating with or entertaining someone, and the
hotel that you stayed in while looking at your properties.
Expenses for your technology gizmos
When running a business, you need to keep up with the latest technology and
stay in touch, right? Well, you can’t do it without all the latest tech gizmos,
such as a cellphone or PDA, a computer with Internet and fax capabilities,
and software programs for keeping your business organized. All these
expenses are tax deductible as long as you’re using them completely in
your real estate investing business. These items should not be mixed with
personal usage.
Of course, you can’t go overboard and claim that everything tech-related in
your house is part of your business. But if you purchase a phone system to
use both for your business and for your residence, and you have two busi-
ness lines and one home line, you have a good argument to claim two-thirds
of the cost of the phone system as a tax deduction.
307Chapter 16: Expert Tax Advantages and Strategies
308 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Chapter 17
Leaping into a Commercial
Real Estate Career
In This Chapter
 Helping others buy and sell commercial property
 Managing commercial property as a career
 Lending money to commercial real estate investors
 Appraising commercial property
Entrepreneurs live a life of action and risk and can be rewarded hand-
somely for it. A good portion of us who make a living in the commercial
real estate business have been afforded great lifestyles because of the risk we
took at some point in our lives. We invite you to do the same.
Leaping into a commercial real estate career is exciting because you can
venture into so many different areas. It doesn’t matter your personality type,
background, and most times, even your education. It’s a wide-open field of
opportunity. Of all the successful people we know and work with in commer-
cial real estate, we see three success traits in every one of them: integrity,
perseverance, and understanding the value of relationships.
In this chapter, we discuss the many career choices in commercial real estate,
from starting out as a commercial sales agent, to becoming a property man-
ager of commercial buildings, to doing big loans on large pieces of property,
to getting paid to give your opinion on the value of real estate. Most of these
wonderful professions require a certain entrepreneurial spirit, but the life
rewards as well as the financial rewards are limitless.
Becoming a Commercial Sales Agent
You’re about to enter a realm of the elite. Becoming a commercial real estate
sales agent is a huge commitment, but it pays off in so many ways. The oppor-
tunities in this field are numerous. You can work in office buildings, retail
centers, multifamily apartment complexes, or industrial parks. And even those
categories have their own subcategories. Commercial sales agents are seen
as the “cream of the crop” in real estate sales because of their ability to put
together big deals that involve tens of millions, if not hundreds of millions, of
dollars. It’s difficult to describe the feeling you get when you close on a trans-
action for a multimillion-dollar commercial property that took four to five
months, countless meetings and teleconferences, and the coming together
of buyer and seller. Now it’s time to see if you have what it takes to succeed.
Four myths of commercial real estate sales
Here are a few misconceptions about selling commercial real estate:
 Residential real estate sales is a steppingstone to commercial real estate
sales. You have two different products and two different consumers.
Focus on one or the other. You can compare this myth to a salesperson
who believes she must know how to sell U.S.-made passenger cars before
she can sell high-end European sports cars. But really, it just doesn’t
matter. A salesperson is a salesperson, period.
 Commercial real estate is too complicated. Commercial real estate isn’t
more complicated than residential; you just have to know different infor-
mation. Consider the U.S. car and European car example. Finding out
about U.S. cars takes the same effort as finding out about European cars.
The content is very different, however.
 You can make more money in commercial sales than in residential
sales. Although this can be viewed as potentially true, income generation
comes from having your act together. If you don’t know what you’re doing,
regardless of which field you’re in, your income will suffer. As they say,
“You’ll get out what you put in.”
 You need a broker’s license to be a commercial sales agent.
Commercial sales agents fall under the same licensing requirements as
residential sales agents. In most states, any sales agent, commercial or
residential, must work under a real estate broker. But you don’t need a
broker’s license to do big deals in commercial real estate sales. All you
need to get started is a sales agent license and to be under a broker.
Four truths of commercial real estate sales
Here are some surprising and also tough truths about commercial real estate:
 You can make a great living from commercial real estate sales. How
much money you make really depends on how hard you work and how
focused you are. Your earnings potential is unlimited. We know of agents
who make several millions of dollars per year. But don’t forget that a
310 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
great living also includes having great relationships. Those are attained
by operating with integrity and professionalism.
 Commercial real estate sales is all about “the relationship.” Bart, a
good friend of ours, loves commercial real estate sales and makes several
million dollars per year in commissions. His success comes from putting
the relationship and his clients’ success before any commissions. We
have personally watched him walk away from commissions to maintain
his integrity and the relationship with the client. Bart clearly sees his
clients as his lifelines to wealth.
 Commercial real estate sales isn’t for the fainthearted. This is a tough
business that’s highly competitive with very driven people. Things move
fast. Decisions are made quickly, impersonally, and seemingly without
much time to think them through. If you take failure or rejection
personally, this business isn’t for you.
 No single commercial real estate brokerage firm dominates the U.S.
market. In fact, the nation’s five largest firms account for only 13 percent
of the nation’s commercial real estate sales volume. The U.S. market is
fragmented, meaning that no one firm can claim to have significant market
share. Do the math. That means 87 percent of U.S. sales is yours for
the taking.
Real estate agent versus real estate broker
Just what is the difference between a real estate agent and a real estate broker?
This section gives you the facts of the matter, although some answers may
differ in your state. Check your state laws if you decide to pursue a career in
this field.
What distinguishes a real estate broker from a real estate agent is the licensing.
There are two types of licenses — a salesperson license and a broker’s license.
A person with a salesperson license (generally called a real estate agent) can
only perform salesperson duties, like representing sellers and buyers while
earning a commission. Someone with a salesperson license must have a
broker’s supervision to perform those duties.
Someone with a broker’s license has a few more rights and privileges than a
person with only a salesperson license does. A broker can do what a sales
agent does, plus the following:
 Start his own office and hire and manage other sales agents
 Receive commissions or referral fees (a sales agent can only receive fees
through his or her employing broker)
 Manage property (in most states)
311Chapter 17: Leaping into a Commercial Real Estate Career
These are the only real advantages of having a broker’s license over a salesper-
son license. Having one or the other doesn’t give you more skills, credibility, or
increase your business volumes.
Getting your foot in the door
If you think commercial real estate sales is for you, take a minute to do some
honest-to-goodness self-examination. This potentially lucrative business is
at-heart, entrepreneurial. Therefore, ask yourself the following questions:
 Am I a self-starter and self-disciplined? Every morning, you have a
choice to go out there and make things happen or to pull the covers
over your head and go back to sleep.
 Am I competent and trustworthy? These are traits of a successful and
prosperous salesperson. Are you willing to put in the hours of study
time to be a walking encyclopedia of your market? Can people rely on
you? Do you show up on time for meetings?
 Am I a competitor? Do you thrive or just try to survive when business
gets tough? This industry is very competitive by nature because of
what’s at stake — big dollars. You have to be a go-getter.
If you answered “yes” to all of the above, you’re ready to get your real estate
sales agent license (or in some states you can jump right into getting your
broker’s license). To get your licensing, go to your state’s department of real
estate and check out the requirements to take the license exam.
After you’ve passed the licensing exam, it’s time to find a commercial real
estate brokerage firm to work for. First, decide your area of expertise: office,
retail, multifamily, or industrial. If you love dealing in apartments, you don’t
want to work for a company that’s known for downtown office investments.
After you select your field, locate those companies that handle the properties
you’d like to focus on. The best way to get started on finding them is by word
of mouth. Big-name firms can be just as good as the smaller local firms.
Next up, you need to interview the firms. You’ll find that even though the
firms you’ve chosen may sell the same product, the inner workings of each
firm can be dramatically different. The following are some tidbits to consider
and ask about when interviewing firms:
 Commission splits: Understand what the commission splits are with
your broker. Usually, new agents start off with a 50-50 split. When your
income reaches a certain level, the split should decrease in your favor.
 Training program: Ask if a training program is available. Some of the
larger national firms offer structured training. We know of one firm that
offers boot camps for new agents. Or the firm may let you “hang out”
with an experienced agent.
312 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
 Management structure: As you know, a company’s success starts from
the top. Ask about the top management’s visions, its experience, and
its street reputation. See if the answers line up with the management’s
actions.
 Office support: This will differ from large national firms to smaller local
firms. But make sure that critical forms and agreements are readily avail-
able. Ask what type of technological support is available and whether you
have to pay to use it. And last, find out whether someone who’s more
experienced than you is available to answer simple questions.
Living the life of a commercial sales agent
Attending your kid’s basketball games and karate tournaments. Having a lunch
date with your loved one on a whim. Taking off on a mountain bike ride mid-
week to escape for a few hours. Flexibility and freedom. Potentially, these are
all possible after you make it as a commercial sales agent.
But in the beginning, life as a commission-only salesperson can be quite
stressful. It can take up to four months just for a deal, from start to finish, to
close and get paid. Therefore, having a lot of deals in the works at once is how
life goes. Having several months of savings for living expenses and living on
a budget are important for the beginning agent.
Here are a couple of tips that can help in your early days:
 Get a mentor. Having a mentor at this stage of your career is all about
exchange. In exchange for your mentor’s time and knowledge, what are
you offering? Of course, you don’t have much to offer right now, correct?
We recommend putting on your “servant” hat and volunteering to take
care of any small tasks that bog him or her down. You can discover a
great deal about the inner workings of the business this way. But most
important, be a good student. Show up on time. Have a grateful attitude.
Be present. Be respectful.
 Get a good grasp of the nuts and bolts of the profession. You should
study and become familiar with the fundamentals of real estate law, taxa-
tion (including 1031 exchanges), contracts and agency, title, surveys,
property analysis, appraisals, financing, zoning and land use, environmen-
tal issues, and property management. Knowing the basics of at least these
things should give you a little credibility in the field, especially when first
starting out.
Most newbies start out by representing buyers or investors. Buyers are easy
to come by. Finding properties that fit their criteria will be your challenge,
but you can do it. This is how most new commercial agents close their first
deals while working on building their client database and planning marketing
efforts in the meantime.
313Chapter 17: Leaping into a Commercial Real Estate Career
After you’re engrossed in the “everydayness” of your new career, you’ll dis-
cover that the most successful and highly paid sales agents put a lot of focus,
energy, and dollars into two things: leads and listings. These two things keep
the commission checks rolling in and enable you to run your business
instead of the business running you.
Getting leads and listings
Getting leads and listings are at the roots of success in this business. Of
course, the two are related. You can have the greatest sales skills this side of
the Mississippi. You can also have the keenest knowledge of real estate negoti-
ations (see Chapter 5) and be a master of your market. But if you have no one
to talk to (leads, that is), all that skill and knowledge is for naught. The key to
generating leads is to go out and capture an audience of interested potential
clients who own property and know of others who own. You can’t get listings
if you don’t generate leads.
Getting leads and listings starts with studying your brains out to get industry-
specific knowledge. Your goal is to attain laser-like knowledge of your area of
expertise. If you’re going to work in multifamily properties, you should know
the most recent closed sales transactions, whether you closed them or not,
and you should also know the going cap rates for your area (see Chapter 3
for more on cap rates). If your area of specialty is in retail, you should know
locations, specific demographics, and price per square foot. Market your
expertise and know-how to generate leads. You want your leads turned into
potential clients, and then into clients, so they need to feel confident in your
competence as their advisor and agent.
Focus on becoming an expert in one field. Today, generalists are few and far
between because the markets are huge and have a lot of moving pieces. You’ll
find that the most successful sales agents are known for one type of asset. This
is where they make their names and reputations known. Being a “jack-of-all
trades” doesn’t work effectively in this business. Being a specialist does.
After you have your knowledge quotient up, it’s time to focus on a certain
geographic territory. In the commercial real estate sales business, this is
called farming an area. The theory behind farming is to market your expertise
to clients in a particular territory, with the hope that the better you know the
territory, you’ll become the territory’s expert, and more leads will come in.
Effective farming gets your face known in the territory.
Farming involves sending out strategic and interesting marketing materials
such as postcards and market info sheets with your name and contact infor-
mation. It is a well-known fact that when a mail campaign is taken on, only
2 percent of the mailings actually result in a lead. Therefore, if you send out
1,000 pieces of mail, you’ll get maybe 20 responses on average. Another part
of farming is the dreaded cold call; calling someone you don’t know personally.
Cold-calling is a very effective way to generate leads as well as pick up new
314 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
and interesting tidbits of data on your market. The easiest way to generate a
cold-call list is to get a list of property owners from a title company.
The National Do Not Call Registry prohibits telemarketers from selling goods
and services through interstate phone calls to those consumers who register
their phone numbers. This means that you can’t cold-call someone who’s regis-
tered on the National Do Not Call List. We urge you to go online to retrieve a list
of registered callers, cross-check it against your list, and mark any names that
appear on both lists as “do not call.” A consumer who receives a telemarketing
call despite being on the registry can file a complaint with the Federal Trade
Commission. Violators can be fined up to $11,000 per incident. Go to
www.donotcall.gov for details.
Taking your new listing to payday
Hooray! You got your first listing! Here are ten easy steps that can help you
take it to closing and get paid:
1. Prepare your marketing blasts for the new listing.
Get your marketing repertoire in full swing — e-mails, mailings, call lists,
and subscription listing services.
2. Market-blast your new listing to everyone every which way you can
all at the same time to give it maximum exposure.
The more exposure you give the listing, the higher the value you’ll get in
return. It’s proven. The more money your seller makes, the happier he’ll
be, and the more likely the next listing — or at least some referrals —
will come your way.
3. Follow up on all inquiries.
4. Show the property to the interested and potential buyers.
5. The buyer submits a sales and purchase contract. You and the seller
negotiate with the buyer and his agents.
6. When everyone has agreed on the terms of the deal, finalize the
contract.
7. The buyers go through their due diligence and check out the property
thoroughly. Your role as the agent is to make sure that the buyer and
seller deliver to each other what the purchase contract calls for.
8. The buyers get approved for their new loan on the property. You
should confirm that everything else is on track, such as the title work
and contract contingency removals.
9. Closing the transaction is on schedule and will take place in 15 days.
Again, your job as the agent should be to make sure that your client
has everything he needs at this point.
315Chapter 17: Leaping into a Commercial Real Estate Career
10. Closing day is here. The closing goes smoothly. Clients are happy. You
receive your commission check from the title or escrow company.
You’re happy.
Congratulations! Now, do it again!
We know, we know. Selling property doesn’t happen this smoothly all the
time, but every once in a while, you’ll get to enjoy a transaction like this.
Being a successful independent broker
At some point in your successful career, you may want to make a go of it on
your own and start your own company. You’ll be required to obtain your real
estate broker’s license as you venture out on your own. There are obvious
pros and cons in becoming an independent broker.
The pros, the way we see them, are
 You’ll have no one to answer to — you get to be your own boss. You’ll
have more freedom and leeway in your listings, and you’ll have more
control over the quality of your work.
 You won’t have to split any commission fees. That’s huge dollars earned
and saved. Say you have a 3 percent commission on a $2 million deal
coming to you. That equals $60,000. As an independent broker, 100 per-
cent of that comes to you. If you work for a firm, you’d have to give up
maybe 10 percent to the firm, and then 50 percent for your broker’s
split. So you’d end up with $27,000.
 You probably won’t have to transact as many deals because you won’t
have to split commissions.
 As an independent broker, you’ll tend to form relationships with other
independent brokers. That’s a good thing because the camaraderie devel-
oped favors doing future deals together. After you develop a reputation for
smooth closings, other brokers want to do business with you.
But wait, we see a few cons as well:
 You’ll be a business owner with business-owner responsibilities, such
as possibly hiring and overseeing employees, paying for overhead costs,
carrying liability insurance, and finding office space to lease or setting
up a home office.
 Start-up costs will include office furniture, office equipment, phones, and
stationery.
 You may lose a few clients who are loyal to your old firm.
316 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
When becoming independent, don’t forget what made you successful. It
wasn’t the name brand of the firm you left behind. What got you where you
are today were solid salesmanship, hard work, focus, integrity, and profes-
sionalism. Often when independents first start off, they forget about their
area of expertise and go after “any commission” because they’re afraid of not
succeeding or not making ends meet. Resist this mind-set as best you can.
Stick to what worked for you.
Making a Go of It as a Property Manager
Plainly put, the primary goals of a property manager are to
 Meet the objectives of the property owners
 Maximize income and reduce operating costs
 Strengthen tenant retention and relations
 Enhance the property’s visual appeal and increase property value
We explain all the nuts and bolts of achieving these goals in Chapter 11. Here,
we’re going to open your eyes to the seemingly endless career opportunities
of commercial property management.
As you drive through downtown or cruise around your neighborhood, every
commercial property you whiz by is managed by the owner or a third party,
called a professional management company. Apartment complexes, office build-
ings, shopping malls, shopping centers, ministorage centers, warehouses, and
mobile home parks must be managed in some fashion. Open your mind to the
possibilities for yourself.
A quick look at the different property
manager hats you can wear
From the outside looking in, all property managers look alike, vocationally
speaking. But this is far from the truth. In fact, property managers come in
many different ranks. What we mean is that when you call someone a generic
property manager, it’s like calling a soldier a soldier. That soldier may be a
private, a sergeant, or a lieutenant, and with the differing ranks come levels
of management, responsibilities, and duties as well as compensations. Here’s
a look at the breakdown of property manager levels:
 Property management company: You hire this company to manage
your property. It’s sometimes called third-party management.
317Chapter 17: Leaping into a Commercial Real Estate Career
 Property manager: This is the actual person assigned to or contracted
to run the operations of your property. This person may be responsible
for overall operations of several properties simultaneously. She often
has a real estate broker’s license, and in some states, a broker’s license
is required. Check your state requirement.
 Assistant property manager: This person assists the property manager
and is usually in training to become a property manager. She may handle
leasing, collections, and following up on scheduled maintenance while in
training.
 On-site property manager: This person, who is usually employed by the
property management company, usually works in an office set up on the
premises. Typical responsibilities involve overseeing the day-to-day oper-
ations of the property, including but not limited to leasing, overseeing
maintenance and repairs, record keeping, and evictions. Another name
for this position is apartment manager or building manager.
 Real estate asset manager: These managers act as the owner’s real estate
advisor for the property or properties. They advise owners on topics such
as investment strategies and whether to buy, hold, or refinance. They
don’t focus on day-to-day operations, but on the owner’s long-term
financial strategies. They manage the assets.
A real estate license may or may not be required in your state to conduct
the business of property management. Check with your state’s real estate
department for laws and licensing requirements.
Choosing the type of property
you want to manage
The beauty of being a property manager is that every building needs one. You
can choose from four basic types of properties to go into, and those categories
have subcategories you can specialize in.
Residential:
 Multifamily: This area probably has the most opportunity because
it serves our entire population. Everyone needs a roof over his or her
head, right? Multifamily real estate falls into the category of apartment
complexes, townhome developments, condominium and cooperative
developments, and planned unit developments.
 Mixed use: These are typically multistory buildings with apartments on
top and retail centers, shopping, or offices below.
 Mobile home parks: Cities typically designate certain areas where the
“parks” call home. Basically, the homeowner rents space, or pads, as the
concrete slabs are called, from the owner. Some park owners own the
homes as well and rent out them to tenants.
318 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Retail:
 Shopping centers: Size determines what bracket these centers fit into.
From smallest to largest, they’re strip centers, neighborhood centers,
community centers, regional shopping centers, and super-regional malls.
 Specialized centers: This type of property can be a single-tenant-type
property, such as a chain shoe store or sporting goods store, or it can
extend to a factory outlet mall.
Office: Skyscrapers, business parks, multitenant office buildings, single-tenant
office buildings, and medical offices are included here.
Industrial: Manufacturing plants, warehousing, distribution, and ministorage
are included here.
Starting out as a property manager
As a property manager, you’ll take care of the property’s financial operations,
making sure that tenants pay their rents in a timely fashion and paying monthly
bills associated with the property. The property owners may also expect you
to prepare financial statements and monthly reports for them. In those reports,
you’ll have to keep the owners abreast of current occupancy, repairs and
maintenance, rent rolls, and any daily operational issues.
As for daily operations, the property owners will rely heavily on you for this
portion of the workload. You’ll have to contract on the owner’s behalf for
items such as utilities, landscaping, and security. If work needs to go out for
bid, you’ll be responsible for attaining those bids and selecting a bid winner.
Monitoring the contractor’s work is also your responsibility.
Keeping abreast of and adhering to the latest local, state, and federal laws
and provisions are important parts of your role. Just as a normal business
must obey all the laws of business owners, this falls on you as well. You must
keep up with business permits and building codes. So, managing a property
is much like a managing a business.
If you’re required to be on-site, you’ll be expected to monitor the property’s
grounds, any facilities, and/or equipment. Overseeing employees, such as
maintenance staff and office personnel, falls to you. On the public side of the
operation, be prepared to meet with and talk to tenants to handle their issues,
which may include repair requests and/or complaints. An important task that
most on-site managers have are leasing duties — coming up with a sales and
marketing plan to draw in potential tenants, to negotiate leases, and to close
the deal and get tenants moved in. Just as important is ensuring a healthy
level of tenant retention — seeing to it that tenants are satisfied enough to
stick around and remain paying clients of the property.
319Chapter 17: Leaping into a Commercial Real Estate Career
As you can see, to be a property manager requires you to like working with
others, have a pretty tolerant disposition, be well organized, be a good time
manager, and have sales and negotiation skills, in addition to being a solid
communicator. Good computer skills will only help you too!
Finding a job as a property manager
You can get hired as a property manager in two ways. One way is to work
your way up through the ranks. Working as an assistant manager under the
wings of an experienced property manager is a good way to start. We don’t
know about you, but starting from the ground up, is the most fulfilling way
to the top of the ladder in our opinion. The second way is to get your college
degree and apply for a position. Most hired property managers typically
have degrees in real estate, business administration, accounting, and finance.
Great property management companies love new graduates whom they can
train and groom from scratch.
When you’re ready to look for that job, start at the very top of the food chain.
Simply call local property management companies and ask whether they’re
hiring. Job turnover in this industry is no different than any other, so positions
are always opening up. Send your résumé or general qualifications to as many
property management companies as possible, and then follow up with a phone
call. These actions will put you in the best position to get hired, or at least
interviewed.
The property management industry in your town or city is a small world.
Believe it or not, everyone knows everyone. Secrets are hard to keep and
maintain in this industry. Contracts that management firms win, firms that
lose customers, firms that don’t pay their vendors, and firms that can do no
wrong — this information is out there on the street for everyone to know and
discuss. We don’t know how it gets out there, but it does. When you think
about it, you can’t really control your reputation, but you can control your
integrity and conduct. Therefore, no matter where you are, make sure that
you mind your business.
Cashing In on a Commercial
Mortgage Business Career
Our experiences with mortgage people have been interesting. Having worked
for years with both sides, residential and commercial, we have found a
common thread between them. They’re very team oriented and seem to enjoy
320 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
themselves and their work. So, if you like to work on teams, want to have fun,
and make a good living, check out the mortgage business as a career.
Although the general responsibilities of residential and commercial lenders
seem similar, the nitty-gritty details are starkly different. Checking borrower
credit, underwriting the loan, and obtaining an appraisal for the property is
the same for residential as it is for commercial. The processes run parallel,
but the guidelines are different.
The commercial lender is required to have a more diverse skill set than a
residential lender. As explained in Chapter 8, commercial loans are mainly
made based on the property’s quantity of income, quality of income and
property condition, and last, on the merits of the borrower. Notice the order
of priority — income, property, and then borrower. Borrower comes last
in the ranking. In residential lending, it’s the opposite more or less. The
borrower is at the top of the list. With that said, commercial lenders are more
focused on the property’s financials. That’s the skill set you must develop.
Choosing a role to play
You can explore many different career opportunities in the commercial mort-
gage business. And in some companies, it’s likely that you may wear more
than one of the following hats:
 Mortgage broker: This profession arranges loans between borrowers
and banks. They shop other banks to match you with the best mortgage
deal. They don’t lend money directly.
 Mortgage banker: These folks are the bank. They lend money directly to
the borrower.
 Loan officer: These are your frontline folks. They’re salespeople who go
out and get clients. They deal with the borrowers upfront and are the
borrower’s primary contact and source of information.
 Loan originator: This hat may be shared with the loan officer.
Originators make the loan applications.
 Loan processor: They collect, review, and verify all borrower documenta-
tion that’s used to decide whether to approve the loan. Their info is
passed on to the loan underwriter.
 Loan underwriter: These folks are the “loan committee,” so to speak.
They make the final decision to grant the loan to the borrower or not.
They put the property and the borrower under a microscope to evaluate
and analyze the deal’s risks. If the risks fit within their lending guidelines,
the loan is approved. If not, it’s denied or returned for resubmittal.
321Chapter 17: Leaping into a Commercial Real Estate Career
Jumping in
After thinking about a career in the commercial mortgage business, you may
want to talk to some people who do this for a living. We recommend buying
lunch for a couple of lending professionals and picking their brains. Ask them
these types of questions:
 Why did you go into this business?
 How did you get into it?
 What is your favorite part of the business?
 What opportunities for growth do you see?
If you don’t know any lenders personally, ask a reliable friend if she knows
of anyone.
If you want to start off as a loan officer working for a loan brokerage com-
pany, you’re required by law in nearly all states to have a real estate license.
However, you’re exempt in some states from the licensing requirement if you
work for a bank. In this instance, the bank will provide you with all the training
you need to get started as well as supervise you. A mortgage broker, believe it
or not, may or may not have a broker’s license because the requirement varies
from state to state. Mortgage bankers are licensed and audited by the several
state and federal agencies. Loan originators, processors, and underwriters may
or may not be required by law to be licensed. Check into your state laws and
regulations for your licensing and business requirements.
As far as college education, none is required to be a loan officer. What you’ll
find is that loan professionals in commercial lending tend to have more years
of academic and college education than residential lender professionals have.
That’s just the nature of the business. But, by all means, it’s not a requirement.
Consider these points to give you a little more clarity and maybe some
confirmation:
 Do you like crunching numbers and working with spread sheets?
Because getting a commercial loan approved relies heavily on current and
projected net income, you’re going to have to spend a decent amount of
time proving that your borrower’s property is a good risk to the bank.
The bank’s loan approval committee speaks a language called “analysis.”
 Do you mind holding hands? What we mean by this is that the more
relaxed, upfront, and honest you are with your clients, the smoother the
transactions will go. Getting a loan to the closing table is a scary and
daunting thing for some people, so a bit of hand-holding is required.
 Are you a self-starter? If your desire is to start off as a loan officer, then
it calls for the same effort and focus as a successful real estate agent.
You’re going to have to do whatever it takes to bring in new customers,
322 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
keep the current ones happy, and get loans to the closing table. This may
mean thinking out of the box or going above and beyond what’s typically
done in handling situations.
Becoming a lending machine
In every one of the commercial professions that we mention in this chapter,
there are always the chosen few who are considered super-duper, high-income
producers in their fields. They’re the ones we marvel at, watch, and envy
because they generate a huge amount of business. What’s their secret? Is it
luck? Good looks?
Because we aren’t super-duper, high-income-producing commercial loan offi-
cers, we went out and interviewed Terry and Eric, good friends of ours, who
are. We wanted to find out what made these guys tick and so wildly successful.
It’s certainly not their good looks!
Terry, who owns his brokerage and takes on the title of chief lending officer,
shared the following:
 Have strong sales and marketing. Market to a variety of sources —
banks, real estate agents, and so on — using a variety of sources —
direct mail, dynamic Web sites, and so on.
 Don’t wait for the phone to ring. Put all leads and contacts into A, B, and
C categories. Your A list contains clients who provide you with referrals
on a consistent basis; call them at least twice a week. The people on your
B list are clients who would refer you if asked and shown how. Call these
contacts at least every other week. Your C list clients are folks who might
refer you in the near future; stay in touch with them at least once a month.
 Be a reliable advisor to your clients. Be their source of commercial
real estate information. When they have any question on commercial
real estate financing, you want them to automatically think of you.
Our personal experiences in closing commercial loans around the country
with Terry have been great throughout the years. The following list explains
why we keep coming back, why he’s our advisor, and why we refer him to other
investors. You may want to keep these traits in mind when reflecting on how to
become a super producer.
 He’s accessible and full of the latest information, such as interest rate
trends and the latest and greatest loan products out there.
 He delivers bad news quickly. He’s upfront and doesn’t try to hide unfa-
vorable news from clients while trying to fix the problem. We appreciate
this greatly because it allows us to see upcoming challenges and gives
us the chance to be proactive rather than reactive.
323Chapter 17: Leaping into a Commercial Real Estate Career
 He’s a teacher at heart. He explains how the commercial lending process
works just like your fifth-grade teacher taught you social studies. This
makes him approachable, which is important in the seemingly complex
field of commercial financing.
Eric is one of the few lenders we know who rarely sees a slowdown in his
lending business. There are good reasons why. Here’s what he told us:
 Stay focused and have a good work ethic. Make goals and go after
them.
 Do loans for clients that you would personally do for yourself if you
were in their position. This says a lot to clients when you recommend a
certain loan product.
 “Explain stuff well,” as Eric puts it. Take your time and make sure that
your clients have a good understanding of their loan options and that it
fits in well with their investment goals.
Our personal experiences with Eric are the reasons why we think he’s such
a phenomenal producer. Consider these:
 Eric is absolutely the greatest at returning phone calls promptly. We
honestly have no idea how he does it — all the time.
 Eric is a phenomenal real estate investor himself. How many lenders
do you know who invest in real estate? Therefore, he understands our
language of cash flows, exit strategies, and how the loan can impact the
returns on investment. What a way to gain credibility, huh?
 Eric understands he can’t do every loan. But even when he knows he
can’t do our loan, he still gives us advice on that particular deal.
To get more information on Terry, Eric, and a whole bunch of other profes-
sionals that we admire, go to www.commercialquickstart.com to register
your copy of this book. Use code CFD101.
Arriving As a Commercial Appraiser
If you’re in the process of loan approval for purchase or refinance for your
strip center, office building, apartment complex, or land, the appraiser holds
the key to your real estate value. Appraisers systematically analyze and com-
pare properties to estimate the value of yours. Their findings are used for
tax assessment, insurable value, “paper” value for your accountant, divorce,
partnership dissolutions, expert witness testimony, condemnation, and of
course, investment value for we investors.
324 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Finding appraisal work
As an appraiser, you have several choices in whom to work for. Most apprais-
ers turn their eye to residential property and are either self-employed or work
for small appraisal companies. But it doesn’t stop there. Every type of com-
mercial property needs an appraiser to give the property a value. Commercial
appraisers usually specialize in certain commercial properties because of
the unique challenges in valuing a certain piece of property. For example, an
appraiser may be asked to value an office building for purchase, or she may
be asked to value a long-term lease on the same building. And each appraisal
approach to reach the value is different.
Here’s another use of an appraiser that we think is interesting. An appraiser
can recommend, based on her findings, what will give you the “biggest bang
for your buck.” Let’s say you have just inherited 20 acres of raw land sitting
adjacent to the downtown district of your city. What in the world do you do
with it? What do you build on it that will make you the most money? The
appraiser will research the area, collect data on surrounding real estate, and
come up with the “highest and best use” of your property. The highest and
best use concept is defined as “the reasonably probable use that produces
the highest property value.”
Working as an appraiser
Some of the daily tasks that an appraiser may undertake in valuing a piece of
real estate are gathering data on comparable sales, doing a physical inspec-
tion of the property, determining the income potential, measuring the prop-
erty to prepare land diagrams, and figuring out the costs if the building were
to be reproduced.
Appraisers may work for themselves, for small private firms, or for the gov-
ernment. The appraisal business can fluctuate as the market goes. For exam-
ple, if interest rates are low, the purchase and refinance markets cause a lot
of demand for appraisals. As the market slows, less demand is expected.
Appraisers can either be paid per appraisal or can be salaried while working
for an appraisal firm.
The main qualifications to become an appraiser vary from state to state. First
and foremost, you must be licensed in your state or certified and have met
certain educational and work experience requirements. Most times, the educa-
tional requirements can be met at local community colleges or through private,
accredited courses. And the work experience can be met by working under a
senior-level appraiser.
325Chapter 17: Leaping into a Commercial Real Estate Career
To advance in this career, years of experience and exposure play a large
part. Earning accreditations and belonging to a professional appraisal orga-
nization are musts as well. The best-known organization is the Appraisal
Institute (www.appraisalinstitute.org). It awards two professional
designations — one is the Senior Residential Appraiser (SRA), which is for
residential appraising, and the other is Member, Appraisal Institute (MAI) for
commercial real estate. Both are looked on as setting the industry standards
of excellence in the appraisal arena. A second organization to note is the
American Society of Appraisers, or ASA (www.appraisers.org).
326 Part V: Kicking Your Investing into High Gear
Part VI
The Part of Tens
In this part . . .
In this traditional For Dummies part, you quickly
discover some really important stuff. For example,
we provide the top ten ways to increase the value of
your commercial properties. We also include ten great
organizations that you should network with.
Chapter 18
Ten Ways to Increase
Your Property Value
In This Chapter
 Tried-and-true ways to increase commercial property values
 Increasing your net worth with a few simple steps
After you close on your first piece of commercial real estate, we suggest
investing in your own investment. You can take simple actions to increase
the value of your property. Because commercial real estate is primarily valued
on the amount of net operating income it generates, it’s smart to think of ways
to increase your net income and to increase the overall value, equity, and profit
of the property.
Commercial real estate overall is very dynamic and not as immovable or
inflexible as most people think. You can implement simple strategies, such
as raising the rent or reducing your expenses, or you can do complex things,
such as changing the use of the property or hiring a new management team.
The choices are yours for the picking.
In this chapter, we offer ten ways to put more money into your pockets.
Raise the Rents
If your rents are below the market average, you’re losing out on so.me precious
earnings. Lucky for you, the easiest way to increase the value of your commer-
cial property is to raise the rents. To find out if it’s time to raise your rents, get
on the phone and do a quick survey, call your broker and ask her to do a rent
comparables report for you, or call a local leasing agent and pick his brain. One
easy way to tell if your rents are below market is to find out whether you’re the
only apartment complex that rarely has vacancies. This is an indication that
you have the best deal (cheapest rent) in town for tenants.
Rent increases are a very sensitive topic, and usually tenants expect noticeable
improvements or a reason for the increase. So, if there’s a large gap between
their rent and the market rent, try increasing the rent only a bit at a time rather
than in one lump sum. Huge one-time increases will upset and scare away ten-
ants, so that’s the last thing you want to do. However, if you’re filling a vacant
space, it’s okay to charge the new tenant the highest rent possible.
Budget Your Way to Wealth
Reducing operating expenses increases your net operating income in the
same way that raising the rent does. And as the net operating income goes
up, so does the value of your property. The first thing to do is to review all
the expenses with a fine-toothed comb and look for expenses that are out of
the norm. You may need a similar property’s expenses statements to com-
pare, or consider combining heads with an experienced property manager.
That person can go over your expenses with you.
An easy item to check out is property insurance. You humble coauthor Peter
Harris once saved over 25 percent on his annual insurance because his prop-
erty manager had the brilliant idea of getting a blanket policy under which she
put all of her owner’s properties. She got a bulk rate deal that way, and passed
the savings on to him.
Sometimes low-income apartments experience high turnover rates. And
in those buildings, turnover costs (costs to fix up the property and make it
rentable) tend to be the highest of all operating expenses. To cut costs, con-
sider removing the contractors that are responsible for doing your turnover
work. Hire staff to do this work instead. Simply give the staff a list of every-
thing that needs to be done to each unit and the time allotted for each item.
Doing this can save you hundreds of dollars per unit. But the added benefit
that you can’t overlook is that turnover-turnaround time for each unit will
likely be reduced to days rather than weeks.
Give the Property a Makeover
Making improvements to your property can add value in more ways than one.
First of all, giving your shopping center a new façade and repaving the parking
lot gives your tenants a boost of new customers who are looking for the “new”
shopping experience. This boost in turn enables you to raise your rents on new
tenants and sets you up for higher rents when lease renewals come up. Plus, a
well-done makeover and image enhancement always bodes well to add what
investors call “prestige value.”
330 Part VI: The Part of Tens
For an apartment building, upgrading the interior of the units with new appli-
ances, paint, and accents and giving the landscaping a face-lift allows you to
raise rents, and it may also move your apartment into a new class entirely.
Being upgraded to a higher class, say going from a “C” to a “B” class property,
may also place you into a lower cap rate. After the property gets stamped with
a lower cap rate, its value automatically increases. (Turn to Chapter 3 to find
more on cap rates and classifications of properties.)
Change the Property’s Use
Changing a property’s use can significantly change the value of the property.
In some instances, a property can be obsolete for what it was originally built
for. We know of a hospital that was listed and vacant with no buyers in sight.
Along comes a property asset manager for the nearby university. The univer-
sity acquired the hospital property dirt-cheap and proceeded to convert it
to apartments, primarily for students, but open to the public as well. The uni-
versity spent $3.5 million for the renovations and turned the property into a
200-unit apartment complex now worth over $10 million based on the income
it brings in.
Add Goodies to the Property
Most large apartments have swimming pools. So, adding a swimming pool is
no big deal to tenants (and honestly, in some cases, adding one can be more of
a hassle than it’s worth). But other amenities are all the rage. Over the years,
we have been networking with other property owners. All of us share our best
practices with each other to determine the latest “in” things that we can do to
wow our clients and our tenants. Here are some of the amenities that can have
a huge positive impact on your property values, your client’s property values,
and the neighborhood values:
 A business center with computers (bolted down, of course!), fax
machine, and copier
 A conference room to hold meetings
 A fitness center with trainers available for hire
 Free wireless Internet (especially near colleges and universities)
 A coffee bar (we copied the Starbucks theme)
 Concierge services
331Chapter 18: Ten Ways to Increase Your Property Value
Obviously not every property has these amenities, so don’t feel out of the
loop if you can’t add every one (or even more than one!). Because these items
take money and time to plan out and construct, be sure to constantly look at
the costs and benefits of each as they’re used (or not used in some cases).
The goal here of course is to provide your tenants with a unique experience
and well-thought-out service that they can’t get elsewhere (or at least in your
neighborhood). Tenant retention — keeping paying tenants happy and staying
put — is the key to keeping a property stable.
As for a direct cash-generating amenity, consider putting coin-operated wash-
ing machines on the property. If your laundry facilities are accessible and well
marketed, they can be a cash-flow factory (especially if your complex is near a
college or university).
Stand Up to the Tax Man
Did you know that you can argue with the tax man that your property taxes are
too high and get them reduced? We didn’t know that either until one day we
received a tax bill two years after purchasing the property — it had increased
by 200 percent! After fainting and taking medicine for heart palpitations, we
called the tax assessor’s office and asked for an explanation. We were told that
in our state, taxes are reassessed every three years. And the reassessment is
based on market value, which happens to be the purchase price. The owner
prior to us bought the property 17 years ago, so his tax bill was based on the
price he paid. So, to make a long story short, we presented our case to the tax
assessor board of appeals with the aid of an attorney who specializes in tax
appeals. In the end, we were able to prove what we thought our property
should have assessed for. The taxes still increased, but the percentage was
much more manageable than 200 percent.
The best advice we can give you is to get an appraisal to determine the market
value of your property. And second, get a real estate attorney who specializes
in property tax grievances to fight on your behalf.
Pass Utility Expenses to Tenants
Utilities are one of the fastest growing expense categories for commercial prop-
erty owners. Landlords are pretty much at the mercy of the utility companies,
especially if they pay for any of the property’s utility bills. On some properties,
particularly those built in the 1970s and prior, landlords may pay for electric,
gas, and water usage because back then, the spaces or units didn’t have indi-
vidual utility meters. So, the landlord is stuck with paying for every tenant’s
utility bills. This situation creates a sure opportunity for the tenants to abuse
utilities, such as water usage, because they aren’t paying for it.
332 Part VI: The Part of Tens
You can implement some solutions that positively affect your bottom line
and add value immediately. For example, if you have a gas-heated property
that’s warmed with boilers, but the electric is individually metered, consider
removing the boiler and installing baseboard heaters that run off of the unit’s
electricity. That way, the tenant can control the heating of his own unit and
pay for it. Your gas bill will go from thousands of dollars per month during
the winter to nearly zero.
Unfortunately, the cost of water has increased dramatically over the last few
years and most properties have one water meter that the landlord pays for.
But we’re finding that more and more landlords are passing most of the water
costs to the tenants via a method called sub-metering. When you sub-meter
the water bill, you install a meter outside of each unit and measure the usage
per month. Then you, as the landlord, can charge the tenants for their usage.
This accomplishes two things: Your water bill reduces dramatically, and the
tenants start to conserve water now that they’re paying for it. And the results
go to boost your bottom line.
Renegotiate the Leases
Strong leases equal strong value. In other words, when you have solid leases
with plenty of time left on them, you’re more likely to receive a higher
appraised value from an appraiser.
Leases are the lifeblood of commercial real estate. A ten-year lease with rent
increases every three years is worth more to investors (and lenders) than a
one-year lease with no intention of the tenant to renew. It is a good idea to
sign new tenants to long-term leases and to renegotiate or extend current
tenant leases to maximize the value of your property.
Here’s an example: Timothy, a friend of ours, was in the middle of refinancing
his mixed-use property on the outskirts of downtown. It was a total of 19
units; it had a mix of quality apartments upstairs and high-end retail stores
on the bottom floor. He had spent hundreds of thousands of dollars rehab-
bing the property. So, when his appraisal came in, he was shocked to find out
that his property appraised for about 10 percent lower than what he conserv-
atively expected. The reason for this decrease was because various tenant
leases had expired and had turned to month-to-month agreements and others
had less than a year left until they expired. Tim was instructed to go back to
the tenants and do two things: have the expired lease tenants sign new long-
term leases and renegotiate the others that were expiring to long-term leases.
Even though only a few of the new leases were for higher rents, just by show-
ing the appraiser that he had solid leases with a decent amount of time left
on them, he was able to achieve his higher appraised value for his refinance
to go through.
333Chapter 18: Ten Ways to Increase Your Property Value
Bring in a New Management Team
You’ve seen it before. Big entertainment companies and sports franchises do
it all the time. New management teams with new ideas, new philosophies, and
totally different energies, come in and save the company or team from their
demise or jolt them to brand-new levels of performance. The same can apply
to your property. Bringing in a new management team to your property can
add tremendous worth to your property. New management can bring in fresh
ideas on increasing income, reducing expenses without harming the opera-
tions, enhance the tenant experience and satisfaction, and give the property
appearance that “fresh” feeling. All of this does nothing but increase the
value of the property.
Split Up Your Land
If you’re a landlord of raw land, there are many ways to increase your property
value. You can develop it and cash in when the properties are sold. But before
you develop it, why not just add utilities and build roads? By doing this alone,
you add value because now it has great development potential. You can sell it
at this point because you’ve just fast tracked the land for development for an
investor or developer.
Make it even simpler to add value by splitting the lot of land up into separate,
smaller lots that are large enough to put a stand-alone property onto. After
it’s divided up and sold separately, the total will be far greater than selling it
off as one lot.
Getting land that’s entitled is a sequence of events leading up to having the
land approved for more productive use. If the land is currently approved for
industrial use, but it’s found to be a poor location for such use, and the land
was then approved and entitled for multifamily residential use, that’s where
the big dollars are made. Either splitting land into smaller pieces, or getting
it approved for a higher use, makes land ownership very lucrative.
334 Part VI: The Part of Tens
Chapter 19
Ten or So Easy Ways to Network
In This Chapter
 Making the most of your real estate relationships
 Discovering the essentials of networking
 Joining real estate organizations to meet the best of the best
Throughout this book, we place an extremely high value on the “R” word —
relationship. Why? Being successful in commercial real estate depends on
your desire and ability to strike new relationships with people and profession-
als who hold something you want or need. No matter what you may have heard
there’s no such thing as a “self-made” person in the commercial real estate
business. Anyone who has attained any level of success had help from an
established relationship along the way.
In this chapter, we jump-start your relationship hunting by providing you with
essential tips for networking in the commercial real estate world. These are
just the tip of the iceberg when finding great relationships, great investments,
and integrity-filled businesspeople to partner and network with, grow with,
and realize your dreams with.
Get Your CCIM Designation
Ever want to attend medical school just to earn the prestigious “MD” stamp
after your name? How about having the highly respected “CPA” added to your
last name? Having earned either of these titles brings you automatic credibil-
ity in the respective industry. In commercial real estate, we have such a presti-
gious tag: CCIM, which stands for Certified Commercial Investment Member.
This title designates you as a recognized expert in the disciplines of commer-
cial and investment real estate. Once earned, you’ll be among only 9,000 or so
elite professionals worldwide who hold the CCIM title. Titleholders include
brokers, asset managers, commercial lenders, leasing agents, developers,
property managers, and investors, just to name a few.
To earn the CCIM designation, you must pass commercial core educational
courses, submit a résumé of completed commercial investment transactions
or consultations, and pass a comprehensive examination. These rigorous
requirements ensure you and the public that you not only have a command
of commercial real estate investment theory but that you also have relevant
practical experience.
Put Power in Your Search Engines
It’s easy to look for a house online in any city. You just go to the city’s multi-
ple listing service (MLS) and see what’s out there. With this service, you see
prices, pictures, property features — you name it. But for commercial real
estate, no such service exists in each city. The next best things are indepen-
dent online listing services for commercial real estate. Two companies have
filled this niche, and they did it in a big way. One company is LoopNet and
the other is CoStar Group.
LoopNet, Inc., (www.loopnet.com) refers to itself as the largest commercial
real estate online listing service in the world. It’s an easy-to-use Web site that
lists properties that are for sale and for lease worldwide. LoopNet reports
to have more than 500,000 commercial properties for sale and for lease on
its Web site. You can also search for brokers nationwide who specialize in a
field that you’re interested in. LoopNet even provides reports on recent sales
and closings nationwide in hundreds of cities. LoopNet is a powerful way
to get immediate access to deals and commercial professionals of a broad
nature. It’s a great starting point for investors to contact brokers to get their
investment ball rolling.
CoStar Group, Inc., (www.costar.com) calls itself the number one commercial
real estate information company in the United States and United Kingdom. And
judging from its extensive Web site and the wide range of services offered it
would be difficult to disagree with its status as number one. CoStar offers a
commercial property listing service that’s similar to LoopNet.
CoStar has the most comprehensive database of property information we’ve
ever seen in one Web site. If you’re looking for an investment property for your-
self or client, or if you want to expose your property (or your client’s) to mil-
lions of people, CoStar can get the job done. When you need detailed, accurate,
and up-to-date information on comparable sales, this company sets the bar;
it tracks more than 1.9 million properties in its database. CoStar is invaluable
for finding commercial deals of all types and for advertising your business. It’s
also a powerful networking tool for any commercial professional or would-be
professional.
336 Part VI: The Part of Tens
Go Directly to the Investment Firms
You can find firms to work with several ways, but the best way to find one
is by referral from a fellow investor. After you find some firms you like, you
need to make the call to see whether they fit your investment criteria. But
most important, you must develop a relationship with a person within the
firm. The best way to find an agent or advisor to begin work with is through
referrals; referrals from another satisfied investor are best.
Begin by calling on a few of the following “big dogs” in the commercial real
estate investment industry:
 Sperry Van Ness Commercial Real Estate (www.svn.com)
 CB Richard Ellis Group (www.cbre.com)
 Marcus & Millichap (www.marcusmillichap.com)
 Colliers International (www.colliers.com)
 Coldwell Banker Commercial
(www.coldwellbankercommercial.com)
 Grubb & Ellis (www.grubb-ellis.com)
 Staubach (www.staubach.com)
 Cushman & Wakefield (www.cushwake.com)
There are hundreds of smaller local firms out there that can do the same
level of work you require. We have great small firms that we continue to work
with today and they were found in various ways — referrals, LoopNet, CoStar,
and by going to commercial broker networking events.
Read the Trades
To stay ahead of the game, we suggest that you subscribe to (and read!)
online commercial real estate newsletters and magazines. Here are a few
online newsletters that we recommend:
 GlobeSt.com (www.globest.com)
 RealEstateJournal.com (www.realestatejournal.com/commercial),
which is a property guide from the Wall Street Journal
 Commercial Property News Online (www.cpnonline.com)
337Chapter 19: Ten or So Easy Ways to Network
 Multi-Housing News (www.multi-housingnews.com)
 MortgageDaily.com (www.mortgagedaily.com)
Here are some real estate magazines that can be helpful:
 National Real Estate Investor (www.nreionline.com)
 Commercial Investment Real Estate Magazine, which is the magazine of
the CCIM Institute (www.ciremagazine.com)
 Multifamily Executive (www.multifamilyexecutive.com)
 Shopping Center Business (www.shoppingcenterbusiness.com)
 Development Magazine (www.naiop.org)
For Apartment Owners: Join the NAA
The National Association of Apartment Owners (NAA) was started in 1939
to serve as a legislative advocate (a government watchdog) and to serve the
interests of apartment owners, property managers, leasing agents, developers,
maintenance personnel, and apartment industry suppliers. The NAA has nearly
200 state and local chapters, and it supports over 50,000 multifamily housing
companies and corporations that control over 6 million apartment units or
homes in the United States.
The NAA is well known for its educational programs and training aimed at
apartment or multifamily housing professionals. It focuses particularly on the
management of properties. It awards six nationally recognized designations to
members who complete its courses and requirements. As we see it, the NAA
certainly sets the standards of excellence and professionalism in providing for
the public’s housing needs.
Joining one of the local chapters is the best way to get the most out of your
NAA membership. The NAA also offers a useful tool to investors who are
looking to set up an operating budget or who just want to see what income
or expenses they could expect for a new property. This tool is the “Survey of
Income and Expense Data” report. This report is taken from thousands of
apartment owners nationwide as to where their properties are operating in
terms of income and expenses. Other invaluable benefits of membership
include admittance to its annual multifamily housing trade show and confer-
ence (which is by far the largest in the industry) and access to the career
center connecting qualified professionals with great multifamily companies.
Visit www.naahq.org for more information on the NAA.
338 Part VI: The Part of Tens
For Office Building Owners:
Get Involved with BOMA
The Building Owners and Managers Association (BOMA), which is more than
a century old, is a huge network of professionals who take part in owning,
managing, leasing, and developing office buildings, medical office buildings,
and corporate facilities. BOMA states that current members collectively own
or manage more than 9 billion square feet of office space, which represents
more than 80 percent of the prime office space in North America. In addition,
it reports 80 percent of its members have annual budgets over $1 million. With
those figures, BOMA seems to be the place to go to get important information
concerning office buildings as well as to network with the insiders. For more
info, check out www.boma.org.
BOMA is the nation’s largest and most influential lobbyist for office building
legislation. It sets the industry standard for operations and reporting by pro-
ducing research documents. Every year, it hosts the North American Real
Estate Congress and Trade Show, which is the nation’s largest gathering of
office building professionals. Membership is available through any 1 of 92 local
BOMA associations nationwide. You’ll get access to its real estate advocacy
group, live networking events, and access to vital information such as its
publications and seminars.
For Shopping Center Owners:
Enlist with the ICSC
The International Council of Shopping Centers (ICSC) originated in 1957 and
is 70,000 members strong today in the United States, Canada, and many other
countries worldwide. It supports shopping center investors, owners, property
managers, developers, marketing specialists, commercial lenders, retailers,
and other commercial professionals. The ICSC takes on the role of middleman
between the government, consumers, and retailers in establishing fair business
ethics, practices, and codes of conduct. It studies and reports on indicators
in economics, operations (such as improving management and maintenance
methods), and marketing affecting the shopping center industry.
The elite in the shopping center industry can be found among its 40,000-
attendee annual convention held each spring. If you want to be seen and
heard in this industry, this is the place to do it. The ICSC maintains a global-
reaching research database of economic trends that includes tenant sales,
339Chapter 19: Ten or So Easy Ways to Network
entire shopping center sales, and operational expenses. It also offers world-
class educational programs and certifications for all levels of marketing,
management, and leasing.
The ICSC is a networking giant in the industry. It holds national and frequent
regional conferences and trade shows, allowing shopping owner professionals
of all levels to come together, do deals, brainstorm, and exchange best
practices. For more info, go to www.icsc.org.
For Property Management Professionals:
Become Affiliated with the IREM
For more than 70 years, the Institute of Real Estate Management (IREM) has
been home for real estate professionals who are involved in property manage-
ment of commercial and multifamily properties. IREM reports that its members
manage more than 6.5 million square feet of commercial space and more than
11 million residential units, totaling over $848 billion in real estate assets.
Oftentimes, when commercial professionals look for experienced professionals
and managers or need up-to-date and reliable property management informa-
tion, they begin their search on the IREM Web site (www.irem.org).
IREM is an affiliate of the National Association of Realtors (NAR), which
makes it, just by association, a reputable force in property-owner legislation.
IREM is also well known for its award-winning magazine Journal of Property
Management. Its credentialed membership educational program is world class
and well respected in the industry of management. Nearly every manager that
we have hired to manage or consult has an IREM designation. We begin all of
our research for property management professionals, services, and education
starting with IREM.
Stay Current and Connected
We love commercial real estate because it is constantly changing.
Unfortunately, we promised you in the Introduction that this book is your
“complete how-to guide” for investing in commercial real estate. To help
you keep up with new places to network and other developments as they
happen, make sure to get your free Commercial Training Package at www.
commercialquickstart.com. By signing up, you will also have access to
updated articles, online training, and other goodies for commercial investors.
340 Part VI: The Part of Tens
• Numerics •
1031 tax-deferred exchange
closing dates in, 130
defined, 292, 299–300, 302
exchange accommodators, 303–304
exchange rules, 304–305
as golden goose, 300
loan size, 303
property cost requirement, 303
property list, 304
property types, 303
requirements, meeting, 303
resource, 305
using, 302–305
• A •
absentee ownership, 210–211
accountants
exit strategy scenarios, 124
in finding fixer-uppers, 248
qualifying, 99
accounting
software, 198
system, 194
as tax-deductible expense, 306
as technical skill, 27
accounts payable report, 207
accounts receivable report, 207
actuals, 103
Addendum A, 90
addendums
language, 88–89
for “outs,” 89
placement at end, 88
templates, 69
advertising
property management costs, 203
vacant spaces/units, 197–198
affidavits, 129
amenities, property, 331–332
anchor tenants, 44–45
angry people, working with, 220–221
annual operating expenses. See operating
expenses
apartment buildings. See residential
properties
application and processing cost, 159
appraisal report
defined, 141
fees, 158
appraisals, 113
appraisers
accreditations, 326
as career, 324–326
defined, 146
qualifications, 325
work, finding, 325
working as, 325–326
appreciation
for cash-flow investor, 12
as form of gambling, 12
for long-term hold investors, 13
in poor housing markets, 12–13
as tax strategy, 290
asset protection
business setup for, 213
common-sense tips, 219–222
complexity, 213
determination, 238–239
entities, 216–217
fail-safe documentation, 219
guidelines, 220
importance, 214–215
insurance coverage and, 221–222
lawsuit avoidance, 214–215
legal fortress, 215–219
savings, 215
treatment of others guideline, 220
treatment of problems guideline, 220–221
Index
attorneys
in asset protection, 219
for closing, 120
cost, 158
in finding fixer-uppers, 248
real estate, 100, 120
specialization, 100
for tenant disputes/evictions, 199
title work review, 125
• B •
big box retailers, 69
bill of sale, 129
blanket mortgages. See also creative
financing
caution, 175
defined, 165
using, 174–175
BOMA (Building Owners and Managers
Association), 339
borrowers
credit score, 148
documentation needed from, 150
financial qualifications, 15
liquid assets, 148
money reserves, 149
net worth, 148
real estate investing experience, 148–149
strength assessment, 148–149
bottom phase, 31
bottom-fishing, 32
breakeven point
calculation, 39
defined, 38
fixer-uppers, 258, 259–260
illustrated, 39
bridge loans, 155
brokers
building rapport with, 78–79
careers, 316–317
commercial sales agents versus, 311–312
commissions, 61
in finding fixer-uppers, 247
leads from, 63–64
motivation level, building, 80–82
proformas, 35–37
projections, verifying, 38
property tax representation, 37–38
pros/cons, 316
relationship with, 61
budget and capital improvements report,
208
building code violations, 108
Building Owners and Managers Association
(BOMA), 339
business plans
lack of in property failure, 231
writing, 193
business systems, 193–194
buying
best time for, 31
during recession, 232
at end of boom, 232
at rock bottom, 233
trends, 31
• C •
capital gains taxes, 298
capital improvements, 105
capitalization rate (cap rate)
calculating, 43, 47
defined, 34
fixer-uppers, 252–253
as guiding principle, 40
in sales price estimation, 36
use of, 36
cash flow
in bank lending criteria, 36
calculating, 13–14, 43, 46–47
commercial real estate value and, 19
defined, 34
fixer-uppers, 251–252
lenders and, 151
positive, 36, 40
property strength for borrowing, 15
cash-flow investors. See also investors
advantages, 12–13
defined, 12
good versus bad deals, 53–54
342 Commerical Real Estate Investing For Dummies
cash-on-cash return
calculating, 43, 47
defined, 34
as guiding principle, 40
investment emphasis, 36
C-corporation, 296
cellphones, 69
Certified Commercial Investment Member
(CCIM) designation, 335–336
checklists
due diligence, 104–109
property management, 194–195
classes, property, 41, 60
closing
anatomy of, 118
attorney for, 120
basics, 118–122
beginning versus end of month, 121–122
costs, 121, 158–159
date, 116
day, 126–131
East Coast, 120
instructions, 125
lenders and, 126, 141
officially closed, 131
power of attorney for, 129
questions to ask before, 122–124
residential versus commercial, 117
safety checkpoints, 126–131
time, 122
title work, 124–125
West Coast, 120
closing statement
borrower’s transaction summary, 127
defined, 125
elements, 125–126
general information, 127
review, 126
Section A through I, 127
Section J, 127
Section K, 127
Section L, 128
seller’s transaction summary, 127
settlement charges, 128
collections, property management
companies for, 27
commercial banks, 153
commercial fixer-uppers. See fixer-uppers
Commercial Mentoring Program
coaches, 25, 270, 280
conference call, listening to, 82
students, 11, 145, 173–175, 180, 270, 279
commercial mortgage business careers
skill set, 321, 323, 324
starting, 322–323
types of, 321
Commercial Quick Start Training Package,
9, 17
commercial real estate. See also
investments
in building wealth, 10
challenge to the press, 287
down payment requirements, 143–144
evaluating, 33–55
flipping, 14
myths and questions, 28–29
as professional career, 10
“ready to go,” 14
reasons for investment, 21
as relationship business, 10
residential real estate versus, 20–21
risks, 15–18
types of, 10
value, 19
commercial real estate careers
appraiser, 324–326
broker, 316–317
mortgage business, 320–324
property manager, 317–320
sales agent, 309–316
commercial sales agents
brokers versus, 311–312
commission splits, 312
education, 313
farming areas, 314
leads and listings, 314–315
licensing requirements, 310
listings, taking to closing, 315–316
mentors, 313
myths, 210
office support, 313
opportunities, 309–310
343Index
commercial sales agents (continued)
qualities, 312
relationships, 311
starting as, 312–313
training programs, 312
truths, 310–311
working as, 313–316
commercial seconds, 168–169
companion Web site, this book, 92
comparable sales approach, 47–48
comprehensive plans. See master plans
conduit loans, 154
construction loans, 155
consulting expenses, 306
contacts, creating, 27
contingencies
appraisal, 113
commonly used, 112–113
financing, 112, 142
inspection, 112–113
managing and using, 113
contraction phase, 30
contractors
caution, 265
hiring, 264–265
contracts. See also offers
addendums, 88–89
escape clauses, 92
forms, 91–92
liquidated damages clause, 89–90
memorandum of agreement, 90
standard, 88
conventional lenders. See also creative
financing; lenders
defined, 153
types of, 153–154
conventional loans, 154–156
conventions, this book, 2
corporations, 216–217
in commercial real estate, 296
liability protection, 296
types, 296
cost approach, 49
cost segregation
benefits, 301, 302
defined, 300
moveable concept, 301
property parts, 300
study, 301
value for, 301–302
CoStar, 336
costs
attorney, 158
closing, 121, 158–159
document preparation, 159
due diligence, 101
entities, 295
environmental inspection, 158
eviction, 203
loan, 158–159
property inspection, 158
creative financing. See also lending
blanket mortgages, 165, 174–175
IRA investments, 165, 175
Master Lease, 164, 165–166
options, 165, 173–174
owner carry firsts, 164, 170–171
owner carry seconds, 164, 169
secondary financing, 166–171
techniques, 164–165
wraparound mortgages, 164–165, 172–173
credit score, borrower, 148
credit/background checks, 158
creditworthiness, 160
crime statistics, 18
• D •
deal analysis
apartment, 42–43
retail center, 43–47
dealers
benefits/downsides of, 293
investors versus, 292–293
deals
attracting, 70–73
closing, 117–135
elements looked at by lenders, 151–152
falling for, 237
filters, 91–94
final decision on, 115
finding, 59–73
344 Commerical Real Estate Investing For Dummies
good versus bad, 53–55
land development, 283–287
locking down, 69–70
revisiting, 115
sealing, 77–85
seller price, buyer terms, 170
debt
in cash flow computation, 14
fixer-uppers, 264
in property failure, 227
service, 34
debt coverage ratio
calculation example, 145
defined, 144
range, 145
deductions. See also tax strategies
accounting expenses, 306
consulting expenses, 306
home office expenses, 306–307
property-related expenses, 307
technology devices expenses, 307
transportation expenses, 307
demographics
data, obtaining, 233, 234
defined, 68, 233
determining location with, 68–69
influence of, 233–234
questions, 234
studies, 69
depreciation. See also tax strategies
capital improvements, 299
defined, 297
land improvements (fifteen years),
300–301
magic of, 299
personal property (five to seven years),
301
recapturing, avoiding, 299–300
schedule, 298
in tax losses, 294
as tax strategy, 291
understanding, 298
using, 297–302
development trend, 32
distressed property
defined, 244–245
signs of, 245
distressed/poorly performing owners,
245–246
document preparation cost, 159
documentation, asset protection, 219
double net leases (NN), 44
down payments
lending requirement, 143–144
seller objection, 171
due diligence
attitude, 101
checklists, 104–109
in contract negotiations, 101
cost and time, 101
defined, 17, 97–98, 256
financial checklist, 105–107
financial investigation, 99–100, 257
first items, 102–103
fixer-uppers, 256–258
information verification, 98
legal checklist, 107–109
legal inquiries, 100, 257–258
lender, 158
parts, 99
performing, 100–101
physical checklist, 104–105
physical inspection, 99, 256–257
poor, as property failure cause, 225
potential problems and, 98
problems found during, 114–116
process management, 109–113
purpose, 98
sales and marketing strategy, 258
as team effort, 99–100
third-party specialists/companies for,
99–100
time extension, 116
• E •
easements, 111
economic development trend, 32
effective gross income, 34
entities. See also asset protection
corporation, 216–217, 296
costs and administrative requirements, 295
defined, 132, 216
345Index
entities (continued)
exit strategy planning, 296
liability protection, 295
limited partnership, 297
LLC, 217, 297
multiple, 216
sole proprietorship, 296
tax benefits, 295
as tax strategy, 295–297
use guidelines, 217–218
entitlement, 280, 334
environmental inspection, 107, 158
environmental problems
in land development, 268–269
potential concern, 238
equity, leveraging, 174–175
escape clauses, 92
escrow
closing, 110
defined, 119
instructions, 109, 110, 129
opening, 109–110
escrow officers, 119
estoppels, 41
evaluating properties
professional approach, 47–50
running numbers for, 40–47
terminology, 33–35
evictions
attorneys for, 199
professional property management costs,
203
exchange accommodators. See also 1031
tax-deferred exchange
defined, 303
properties list, 304
selecting, 303–304
Exchanging Up, 305
executive summaries. See also potential
investors
defined, 182
example, 182–183
using, 182
exit strategies
in absentee ownership, 211
before offering, 123
defined, 123, 157
entity selection and, 296
financing selection and, 139
for fixer-uppers, 250
flexibility, 18
land development, 272
multiple, 95
in partnerships, 188
questions, 157
expansion phase, 30
expense stop clause, 45
expenses
in cash flow computation, 14
not knowing, 37
operating, 35, 227
replacement reserves, 41
tax-deductible, 305–307
• F •
farming, 314
fictitious buyer technique, 84–85
filters. See also deals
end user value determination, 93–94
five-minute test, 91
quick view, 92
reality, 93
sign it up, 91–92
financial checkpoints, renovation, 261
financial due diligence checklist, 105–107
financial investigation
due diligence, 99–100
fixer-uppers, 257
financial records, 152
financing. See also lending
contingency, 112, 142
conventional options, 139–140
creative techniques, 163–175
exit strategy and, 139
gap, 155
process, 15, 140–142
qualifications, 15
question, 123–124
finding deals
locally, 66–67
nationwide, 66–68
property search definition, 60
relationships and, 61
secret, 59–61
346 Commerical Real Estate Investing For Dummies
fire insurance coverage, 129
five-minute test, 91
fixer-uppers
advantages, 15
bad part of town, 249
bargain-bottom prices, 263
break-even point, 258, 259–260
bridging the gap, 258–259
cap rate, 252–253
cash flow, 251–252
commercial, 244
contractors, 264–265
debt, 263
diamonds in the rough, 246–250
distress cause, 259
distressed/poorly performing owner,
245–246
distressed/poorly performing property,
244–245
downtown, 249
due diligence, 256–258
example, 244
exit strategy, 250
factors to consider, 255
financial firepower, 250
financial investigation, 257
finding, 246–248
goals, 250
hopeless situations, 263–264
legal inquiries, 257–258
locations, 249, 255
looking for yourself, 246–247
lower-middle class, 249
mapping out plan, 255–263
marketing, 262–263
needs and skills, 250
NOI, 251, 252–253
numbers on example property, 253–254
obsolete properties, 263–264
opportunities, 243
outside help in finding, 247–248
owner financing, 246
owner readiness factor, 255–256
physical condition factor, 255
physical inspection, 256–257
renovation checkpoints, 260–263
sales and marketing strategy, 258
sales price, 252–253
speculation factor, 255
suburbs, 249
success, 243–266
timing for quick sale, 266
forms, 91–92
for-sale-by-owner properties, 86
• G •
gap financing, 155
general ledger report, 208
goals
exit strategies and, 18
fixer-upper, 250
investment, 123–124
potential investor, 178
property manager, 317
property ownership, 134–135
government agency leads, 62–63
Government Services Administration
(GSA), 63
grant deed, 129
greed, 55
green light, 30, 116, 283–287
gross income, 34
gross leases, 44
Guaranteed Millionaire (Phillips), 214
guiding principles, 40
• H •
hard money loans, 156
help, getting, 17
historical performance, 147
home office expenses, 306–307
hotels/resorts
caution, 24
as investment property, 24–25
HUD-1 settlement statement, 128
• I •
icons, this book, 5
ICSC (International Council of Shopping
Centers), 339–340
income and expense statements, 105
income approach, 48–49
347Index
income, in cash flow computation, 14
infill projects, 25, 274
inspections
building code violations, 108
contingency, 112–113
cost, 158
as due diligence, 99
environmental, 107
interior systems, 105
mechanical and electrical, 105
pest, 105
physical, 99, 256–257
physical, routine, 196
seller avoidance, 101
specialists, 99
structural, 104
survey and title, 108
Instant Offer System. See also offers
money, 82–85
motivation level, building, 80–82
rapport building, 78–79
steps, 78
upfront agreements, 80
what-if offer, 85
Institute of Real Estate Management
(IREM), 340
insurance companies, 154
insurance coverage
in asset protection, 221–222
bids, 221
policies, 108
umbrella policies, 222
interest rates. See also loans
controlling, 160–161
hard money loans, 156
secondary financing, 169–170
interior systems inspection, 105
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 63
International Council of Shopping Centers
(ICSC), 339–340
Internet leads, 62
investment firms, 337
investment goals, 123–124
investments
green light, 30, 116, 283–287
leads, 61–66
local, 66–67
myths and questions, 28–29
nationwide, 67–68
reasons for, 21
red light, 30
risk-proofing, 17–18
size, 20
type, focus, 238
types of, 22–25
yellow light, 30
investors
accumulators versus, 237
agreements with, 187
benefits of, 292–293
as big thinkers, 20–21
cash-flow, 12–13, 53–54
connecting with, 183–184
dealers versus, 292–293
long-term, 13, 54
maverick, 32
partnerships, 184–188
payment amount to, 186
potential, 178–184
relationships with, 61
short-term, 54–55
successful, 11–12
types of, 12–13
uneducated, 265
watching, 55
IRA investments, 165, 175
IREM (Institute of Real Estate
Management), 340
• J •
job growth
data, obtaining, 234
nonexistent, 234
trend, 32
• K •
keys, securing, 134
Kolbe Index, 273
• L •
land development
approval process, 281–282
best locations, 274
build approval, 269
348 Commerical Real Estate Investing For Dummies
build type decision, 278–283
cons, 268–269
contracts for more time, 277
deals, 283–287
departments consulted with, 282–283
entitlement, 280, 334
environmental problems, 268–269
exit strategy, 272
free look period, 25
green light, 283–287
as investment, 25
market, 269–272
marketplace position, 272
master plans and, 278–280
money swings, 268
neighborhood opposition, 286–287
options, 277–278
outside expert’s opinion, 271
path of progress, 271
politics, 272
profits, 272
pros, 268
risk reduction, 274
successful, 272
team investment, 273
time equals money, 274–278
utilities availability, 269
zoning, 25
zoning acres, 271
land splits, 334
land value, 269, 278
landmarks commission, 281
land-use maps, 280
late payments, tenant, 197
lawsuit avoidance, 16, 214–215
leads
commercial sales agent, 314–315
friends, 66
government agency, 62–63
Internet, 62
newspaper ad/publication, 62
obtaining, 61–66
property owner association, 64–65
real estate investment club, 65
realtor/broker, 63–64
leases
as commercial real estate lifeblood, 333
consumer protection, 51
defined, 43, 51
as documentation for lender, 151
expiration, 106
flexibility, 51
gross, 44
lengths, 45
modified gross, 44
net, 44–45
as number-one deal killer, 51
in property management, 195
quality of, 147
reading, 52
renegotiating, 333
review elements, 52
value and, 51–52
verification, 106
lease-up checkpoints, renovation, 262–263
leasing agent bonuses, 263
legal due diligence. See also due diligence
checklist, 107–109
cost, 158
fixer-uppers, 257–258
legal ownership
after assuming, 132–135
assuming, 131–132
entity types, 132
takeover status report, 135
lender approval
documentation for, 149, 150
success elements, 149
lenders
actions are louder than words, 157
calling every day, 142
can/can’t do, 157
checking in early with, 41–42
at closing, 141
as closing bottleneck, 126
conventional, 153–154
due diligence, 158
escrow instructions, 129
experience, 156
in finding fixer-uppers, 248
homework on, 156
initial approval, 38
negative deal elements for, 152
points, 161
positive deal elements for, 151
private, 169
349Index
lenders (continued)
in property evaluation, 144–149
selecting, 156–157
underwriters, 126
lending. See also financing
borrower investigation, 141
closing, 141
down payment requirement, 143–144
lender-order reports, 141
lender’s point of view, 140–141
loan approval, 141
moving along, 141–142
preapproval process, 140
process overview, 140–142
property merits in, 143
residential versus commercial, 142–144
underwriting, 141
lessee. See tenants
lessor, 43
letters of intent, 87–88
licenses, 108
lifestyle development policy, 285
lifetime, property, 237–238
Limited Liabilities Companies For Dummies,
217
limited liability companies (LLCs)
in asset protection, 217
disadvantages, 217
in partnerships, 186
for real estate holdings, 297
risk protection, 16, 217
tax benefits, 297
taxation, 217
limited partnerships (LPs), 297
liquid assets, borrower, 148
liquidated damages clause, 89–90
listings
exposure, 315
getting, 314–315
taking to closing, 315–316
loan approval, 141
loan documents, 128
loan officers, 321
loan originators, 321
loan processors, 321
loans. See also financing; lenders; lending
amount, 160
assumption, 161–162
bridge, 155
conduit, 154
construction, 155
conventional, 154–156
cost determination, 158–159
get-out costs, 159–160
hard money, 156
interest rate control, 160–161
long-term, 154
mezzanine, 155
nonrecourse, 218, 239
prepayment penalty, 154, 159, 160, 161
SBA, 155
selecting, 152–161
short-term, 154
signing personally on, 218
stated income, 156
take-out, 155
type decision, 157
U.S. government agency, 155
loan-to-value ratio (LTV)
defined, 146
interest rates and, 161
net operating income in, 146
local investing, 66–67
location
determining with demographics, 68–69
fixer-uppers, 249, 255
in land development, 269
value and, 53
long-term hold investors. See also
investors
defined, 13
good versus bad deals, 54
in partnerships, 188
long-term loans, 154
LoopNet, Inc., 336
LPs (limited partnerships), 297
• M •
magazines, commercial real estate, 338
maintenance
hidden deferred, 152
onsite, 198
professional property management, 203
reporting system, 198
system, 194
tenant-reported issues, 196
350 Commerical Real Estate Investing For Dummies
maintenance and work order activity
report, 208
Making Big Money Investing in Foreclosures
Without Cash or Credit, 163
management. See also property
management
clueless, 230
failure, 230
new, 334
by property, 231
as property failure cause, 229–231
warning signals, 230–231
market occupancy, in property quality,
147–148
market surveys, 199
marketing
fixer-uppers, 262–263
strategy, 258
Marketing For Dummies, 258
markets
knowledge, 17–18
knowledge, insufficient, 225–226
land development, 269–272
as property failure cause, 232–234
secondary investment, 67
tertiary, 67–68
timing, 29, 55
Master Lease technique. See also creative
financing
defined, 164, 165
performance mortgage, 166
seller objection, 171
using, 165–166
master plans
benefits of, 279–280
in build type decision, 278–890
conformance, 278–279
defined, 278
land-use map, 280
math skill requirements, 13–14, 27
mechanical and electrical inspection, 105
memorandum of agreement, 90
mentors
commercial sales agent, 313
finding, 238
in land development, 271
learning from, 238
as tool, 69
mezzanine loans, 155
mixed use, 285
modified gross leases, 44
money reserves, borrower, 149
Money Step (Instant Offer System)
fictitious buyer, 84–85
range, 83–84
realistic expectations, 82–83
mortgage bankers
as career, 321
defined, 154
flexibility, 153
mortgage brokers
as career, 321
commission, 153
defined, 153
mortgages. See also loans
blanket, 165
paying down as tax strategy, 291
payments in cash flow computation, 14
performance, 166
preexisting, assuming, 161–162
wraparound, 164–165
motivation, building, 80–82
• N •
National Association of Apartment Owners
(NAA), 338
National Do Not Call List, 315
National Real Estate Investor Association
(NREAI), 181
nationwide investing, 67–68
negotiations
big stick method, 77
closing costs, 121
due diligence in, 101
education, 237
renegotiating and, 114–115
net leases
defined, 44–45
double (NN), 44
expense stop clause, 45
single (N), 44
triple (NNN), 44–45
351Index
net operating income (NOI)
calculating, 43, 46
in debt coverage ratio, 144, 145
defined, 34, 145
in fixer-uppers, 251, 252–253
importance, 36
use of, 36–37
net worth, borrower, 148
networking. See also relationships
with BOMA, 339
with CCIM designation, 335–336
commercial real estate
newsletters/magazines, 337–338
with ICSC, 339–340
investment firms, 337
with IREM, 340
with NAA, 338
resource, 340
search engines, 336
new taxes, 37–38
newsletters, online, 337–338
newspaper ad/publication leads, 62
nonrecourse loans, 154, 218, 239
numbers
crunching requirements, 13–14, 27
looking at, 103
running, 40–47
running on fixer-upper, 253–254
• O •
obsolete properties, 263–264
occupancy, in property quality, 147
offer price
determining, 36
range, 83–84
realistic expectations, 82–83
offers. See also contracts; Instant Offer
System
accepted, 94–95
commercial contract to buy and sell real
estate, 88–89
initial, 76
letters of intent, 87–88
meeting seller when submitting, 86–87
presenting, 90
shopping, 94
strategies for making, 75–95
unsolicited, 71
what-if, 85
writing up, 87–90
Office of Property Disposal, 63
offices and warehouses
as investments, 22–24
triple net leases, 23–24
online training courses, readers of this
book, 11
on-site maintenance, 198
on-site property managers, 318, 319
operating budget, 134
operating expenses. See also expenses
calculating, 260
in cash flow determination, 251
defined, 35
underestimating, 227
operating history, 151
operating statements, as documentation
for lender, 150
operations system, 194
opportunity loans, 155
options. See also creative financing
defined, 165, 173
land development, 277–278
using, 173–174
overpaying
avoiding, 17
for long-term investors, 54
overpriced properties, owner contact,
72–73
owner financing, 246
• P •
parking ratio, 41
partnerships
agreements, 187
benefits, 184, 185
critical keys to, 185
length, 187
LLC, 186
nonrecourse loans and, 239
partner interviews, 187–188
PPM, 186
questions for, 187–188
structuring, 186
352 Commerical Real Estate Investing For Dummies
time commitment, 188
use decision, 184–185
passive income, 24
passive losses, 294
peak phase, 30
pension funds, 154
people-handling skills, 193
percentage of sales clause, 45
performance mortgages, 166
personal property inventory, 108, 134
pest inspection, 105
photos, 104
physical due diligence checklist, 104–105
physical inspections
due diligence, 99
fixer-uppers, 256–257
planning commission, 281
police reports, 109
politics, land development, 272
population growth
data, obtaining, 234
negative, 233–234
positive cash flow. See also cash flow
defined, 36
as guiding principle, 40
potential gross income, 260
potential investors. See also private funds
connecting with, 183–184
contact information, 179
executive summaries for, 182–183
finding, 178–184
goal, 178
relationships, creating, 179–182
relationships, existing, 179–180
special reports for, 183–184
where to meet, 181
power of attorney, 129
preliminary title reports
buyer approval/disapproval, 111
defined, 110
as documentation for lender, 151
obtaining, 110–111
red flags, 111
prepayment penalty, 154, 159, 160, 161
present, being, 101, 256
presenting offers, 90
previous owners, information from, 133
price per square foot, 41
private funds
payback, 178
potential investors, 178–184
raising, 177–178
private lenders, 169
private placement memorandum (PPM),
186
professional property management. See
also property management
absentee ownership and, 210–211
accountability, 208
agreements, 205–207
benefits, 199–200
candidate search, 202
capital improvement projects, 207
choices, narrowing, 203–204
for collections, 27
company property ownership conflict,
204
company types, 204
credibility/capability, checking, 203–204
day-to-day responsibilities, 200
expectations communication, 204
experience requirement, 203
fees, 203
incapable, 229
initial phone call questions, 203
ins and outs, 200
maintenance, 203
monthly reports, 207–208
prospective company interviews, 202–203
reasons for using, 201
styles, 204
use decision, 201
using, 199–209
weekly reports, 208–209
profile/test, 184
profit
potential, 11–12
question, 123
proformas, 35–37, 103
properties
age of, 160
analyzing, 35–40
353Index
properties (continued)
classes, 41, 60
distressed, 244–245
documentation for lender, 150–151
for-sale-by-owner, 86
income determination, 144–146
lifetime, 237–238
obsolete, 263–264
quality, revealing, 146–148
real estate owned (REO), 248
relisted, 72–73
routine physical inspections, 196
running numbers on, 40–47
scoping out, 102
shopping, 134
taking over, 131–135
unlisted, 73
valuing, 47–50
property failure
bad deals, 225–226
as beginning, 237
consequences, 224
debt cause, 227
defined, 224
environmental, 238
exit strategy tunnel vision, 226
folding, 234–236
insufficient market knowledge, 225–226
investor mistakes, 224–229
investor denial, 228–229
lease renewals, 229
management, 229–231
market, 232–234
not running like business, 226
paying too much, 226
poor curb appeal, 228
poor due diligence, 225
risk, 16
struggling market, 228–229
understanding, 16, 223
vacancy levels, 228
property management. See also
professional property management
business systems, 193–194
checkpoints, renovation, 262
companies, 317
do-it-yourself checklist, 194–195
education, 192
everything in writing tip, 192
focus of, 192
industrial, 319
industry, 320
office, 319
people-handling skills, 193
plan, 210
in property failure, 226
quality in, 193
residential, 318
retail, 319
skills, 192–193
software, 197
strengths and weaknesses, 193
tenant relationship, 192
tips, 192–193
property management agreements. See
also professional property
management
accounting clause, 205
compensation to property manager
clause, 205–206
default clause, 206
fiduciary responsibility/statutory
compliance clause, 206
“hold harmless” clause, 206
leasing clause, 205
money availability, 207
obligations of owner clause, 206
owner approval dollar amount clause, 205
rents clause, 205
reserve amount clause, 205
service contracts clause, 205
termination clause, 206
terms of agreement clause, 206
property managers. See also commercial
real estate careers
assistant, 318, 320
as career choice, 317–320
goals, 317
industrial, 319
interviewing, 203
354 Commerical Real Estate Investing For Dummies
jobs, finding, 320
levels, 317–318
office, 319
on-site, 318, 319
residential, 318
retail, 219
starting as, 319–320
property owner associations, 64–65, 71
property owners. See also sellers
attracting with reports, 70–71
of overpriced properties, 71–72
relationships with, 61
unlisted properties, 73
property ownership
goals moving forward, 134–135
property visitation during, 211
site security, 134
situation assessment, 133
team, assembling, 133–134
property search, defining, 60
property taxes
bills, reviewing, 106–107
broker representation, 37–38
new, 37–38
previous owner information, 133
reducing, 332
property value. See also valuing properties
analysis tips, 35–38
breakeven analysis, 38–39
calculating, 35–40
guiding principles, 40
leases and, 51–52
location and, 53
proformas, 35–37
property use and, 50–51
understanding, 50–53
property value strategies
amenities, 331–332
improvements, 330–331
land split, 334
lease renegotiation, 333
management team, 334
operating expense reduction, 330
property tax reduction, 332
rent increases, 329–330
use changes, 331
utility expenses to tenants, 332–333
• Q •
quality, property, 146–148
quick view filter, 92
• R •
raising private funds
from family, 180
guidelines, 179
keys to, 177–178
potential investors, 178–184
real estate asset managers, 318
real estate commissions, 26
real estate cycle
bottom phase, 31
contraction phase, 30
elements, 18
expansion phase, 30
illustrated, 31
location placement in, 18
peak phase, 30
recession phase, 30
recovery phase, 31
as timing tool, 29
trends and, 29
ups and downs, 232–233
real estate investment clubs, 65
real estate investment trusts (REITs), 154
real estate license, 26
real estate owned (REO) properties, 248
real estate professionals
leads from, 63–64
qualifications, 294
reality filter, 93
recapturing depreciation, avoiding,
299–300
recession phase, 30
recovery phase, 31
red light, 30, 116
rehabilitation checkpoints, 261
relationships. See also networking
in commercial real estate sales, 311
developing, 61
emotional connections in, 77, 79
as professional secret, 10
rapport in, 78–79
355Index
relisted properties, 72–73
renegotiating leases, 333
renovation. See also fixer-uppers
financial checkpoints, 261
lease-up checkpoints, 262–263
process, 260–263
property management checkpoints, 262
rehabilitation checkpoints, 261
rent concessions
defined, 38
as problem, 38
in property quality, 148
rent rolls
defined, 41, 106
detailed, 133
as documentation for lender, 151
matching with estoppels, 41
reviewing, 106
rents
quick view, 92
raising, 329–330
REO (real estate owned) properties, 248
replacement reserves, 41
reports, property management
accounts payable, 207
accounts receivable, 207
budget and capital improvements, 208
general ledger, 208
in initial interview, 203
maintenance and work order activity, 208
monthly, 207–208
weekly, 208–209
Residential Mentoring Program, 275
residential properties
deal analysis, 42–43
defined, 22
down payment requirements, 144
sales price per door, 37
starting advantage, 22
residential real estate
commercial real estate versus, 20–21
need to start in myth, 28
retail centers
deal analysis, 43–47
as investment property, 24
lease lengths, 45
lease types, 44–45
location, 53
percentage of sales clause, 45
rezoning. See also land development
approval process, 281–282
defined, 268
example, 270
risks
investment comparisons, 28–29
lawsuit, 16
levels, 16
managing, 16, 17–18, 30
understanding, 15–18
rolling over, 292
• S •
sales and marketing system, 194
sales price
estimation, 36
fixer-uppers, 252–253
lenders and, 151
in property failure, 226
quick view, 92
for residential properties, 37
seller objection, 172
watching, 55
savings and loan banks, 153
S-corporation, 296
secondary financing. See also creative
financing
commercial, 168–169
common pitfalls, 169–170
finding, 166–167, 168–169
owner carry, 164, 167–168, 169
payment streams, 168
private lenders, 169
seller objections, 171–172
success of, 167–168
secondary investment markets, 67
security, new property, 134
self-directed IRA accounts, 175
sellers. See also property owners
building rapport with, 78–79
delays, 142
as guilty until proven innocent, 101
meeting when submitting offer, 86–87
mortgages, assuming, 161–162
356 Commerical Real Estate Investing For Dummies
motivation level, building, 80–82
needs versus wants, 168
renegotiating with, 114–115
secondary financing objections, 171–172
sizing up, 76–77
types of, 76–77
selling, best time for, 31
service and vendor contracts, 108
settlement charges, closing statement, 128
shopping centers/malls. See retail centers
shopping offers, 94
shopping properties, 134
short-term investors. See also investors
good versus bad deals, 54–55
in partnerships, 188
short-term loans, 154
sign it up filter, 91–92
signing
affidavits, 129
bill of sale, 129
buyer safety checkpoints before, 129–130
escrow instruction from lender, 129
fire insurance coverage, 129
grant deed, 129
HUD-1 settlement statement, 128
mortgage and deed of trust, 128
seller safety checkpoints before, 130–131
truth-in-lending disclosure agreement,
129
single net leases (N), 44
site plans/specifications, 104
Small Business Administration (SBA) loans,
155
Small Time Operator (Kamoroff), 27
soft terms, 167
software
accounting, 198
property management, 197
sole proprietorships, 296
special reports, 70–71
for potential investors, 183–184
titles, 183–184
stated income/no documentation loans,
156
strategic coaching session, readers of this
book, 11
structural inspection, 104
supply and demand, 55
survey and title inspection, 108
survival tips, 236–239
• T •
take-out loans, 155
tax loss
with depreciation, 294
profits with, 293–294
tax returns, 106
tax strategies
appreciation, 290
cost segregation, 300–302
deductions, 305–307
depreciation, 291, 297–302
entity selection, 295–297
mortgage paydown, 291
rollover, 292
1031 tax-deferred exchange, 130, 292,
299–300, 302–305
teams
creating, 185–188
land development, 273
management, hiring new, 334
support, 195
technical skill requirements, 27
technology device expenses, 307
1031 tax-deferred exchange, 130, 292,
299–305
tenants
anchor, 44–45
background/credit checks, 195
disputes/evictions, 199
emergencies, 203
fixer-upper, marketing to, 262
friends with, 192
ideal, 195
late payments, 197
loud noises, 196
maintenance reporting, 196
quality of, 147
rent concessions, 38
training, 195–197
value determination, 93–94
written policies and procedures, 196–197
termite report, 141
357Index
terms factor, 161
tertiary markets, 67–68
third-party management, 317
time, stretching out to close deal, 274–278
timing, 29
title
commitments, 102–103
contingency, 113, 125
defects, 124–125
defined, 110
work, 124–125
title insurance
defined, 111, 119–120
recommendation, 120
title report, 111
title/escrow companies, 100, 120
transportation expenses, 307
trends
buying on, 31
development, 32
economic development, 32
as friends, 32
job growth, 32
population, 68
real estate cycle and, 29
triple net leases (NNN)
benefits, 24
defined, 23–24, 44
drawback, 24
truth-in-lending disclosure statement, 129
turnovers, 35
• U •
underwriters, 126, 321
underwriting, 141
U.S. government agency loans, 155
unlisted properties, 73
unsolicited offers, 71
upfront agreements, 80
urban design commission, 282
utilities
bills, 106
changing, 134
expense, passing to tenants, 332–333
• V •
vacancy, 35
vacancy rate, 35
valuing properties. See also property value
comparable sales approach, 47–48
cost approach, 49
income approach, 48–49
vendors, 198
• W •
walking away. See also property failure
alternative to, 234–235
dishonorably, 236
honorably, 235–236
knowing time for, 235
water department, 282
wealth, building with commercial real
estate, 10
what-if offers, 85
winning, 236, 237
wraparound mortgages. See also creative
financing
benefits, 173
defined, 164–165, 172
example, 172–173
• Y •
yellow light, 30
• Z •
zoning
bureaucrats and, 284–286
code, reviewing, 108
land development, 25, 268, 270, 281–282,
283
neighborhood opposition, 286–287
in property value, 50
zoning acres, 271
zoning board of appeals, 282
358 Commerical Real Estate Investing For Dummies
© OnCourse Learning.